I. Introduction

Anomalous excess thermal power in Pd|D2O+H2SO4 electrolytic cells has been observed
by isoperibolic calorimetry [13]. From 2004 to 2005, the excess power was verified by
Seebeck Envelope Calorimetry (SEC) [4]. Then, no excess heat was observed in SEC
experiments during an eight-month period. Eventually, we found that there is a key parameter
for excess heat reproducibility in isoperibolic calorimetry which had not been satisfied in SEC.
From then on, we were able to obtain excess heat output from 12 consecutive samples using
SEC.We will discuss this and other related issues in detail below.

Another previous discovery of our group is the presence of silver on the palladium surface
after electrolysis in heavy water [16]. In this paper we will present overwhelming evidence
of silver production on samples. This evidence was obtained by intensive microanalysis
studies.

The experimental set-up of the electrolytic cell, power and temperature measurements, and
microanalysis have been reported before [4]. We will not discuss them here, except for some
recent modifications.


II. Calorimetric results

During SEC experiments, we measured three characteristic temperatures, i.e. Telectrolyte,
Tcatalyst and Ttop, where Telectrolyte is the temperature of electrolyte, which is measured by two
K-type thermocouples attached to the bottom of the cell; Tcatalyst is the temperature of catalyst,
which is measured by three K-type thermocouples attached on the outside of the cell at the
level of the catalyst; Ttop is the temperature on the outside of the cell top, which is measured
by one K-type thermocouple attached at the center of cell cap. Another point is that all excess
power results reported here do not include mass loss corrections, as before [4]. This will result
in null excess power for some experiments due to the loss of the heat of recombination of H2O
and D2O resulting from the escape of H2, D2, and O2 gases.

Firstly, we demonstrate the effects of the temperature difference between the SEC wall and
the electrolyte, from the initial value to the steady state value of electrolyte, on excess heat
production. One example is shown in Figure 1. The cell of Exp. No. 050925 was placed in a
large glass beaker (7.2  11 cm2) to prevent leakage of electrolyte; the cell of Exp. No.
051205 was placed into a cardboard box to decrease the rate of heat flow from the cell, thus
raising the cell temperature. The cardboard box size is 11.5  11.5  17 cm3, with wall
thickness of 3 mm. It has a Styrofoam insert 5 cm thick with one hole (5.7  4.1 cm2) in its
center to accommodate the electrolysis cell. We found that, along with the greatly increased
temperature gradient in the latter experiment, excess heat was produced. There was no excess
heat in experiment 050925, which ran at a lower temperature, with a much lower temperature
gradient.

In Exp. No. 051205 and other similar experiments, a cardboard box was always used to
increase the electrolyte temperature. In order to exclude the possibility that the signal of
excess power is only the effect of the heat insulation layer around the cell, we calibrated the
SEC using the cardboard box with the calibration resistor inside, as in the electrolysis
experiments. A resulting calibration constant is 177.04  0.09 W/V, which is within the
average value 176.85  0.25 W/V obtained without cardboard box around that time, as shown
in Table. I. This shows that excess power is not caused by the system configuration. We
repeated this calibration method several times.

Fig. 1. An example of the effect of electrolyte temperature increment on excess heat
production. The cathode in both experiments is sample Pd-E, whose parameters are
shown in Table III. The applied current is 3 A, and the current density is 0.24 A cm2.

Another series of excess power data on background and foreground temperatures for
sample Pd-A besides that reported before [4] is shown in Table II, there is also an optimal
background temperature for excess heat production as reported before [4]. All of these results
indicate that both the temperature under steady-state in electrolysis and the background (or
initial) temperature have important effects on excess heat. These two factors have different
tendency on excess heat. High working temperature and low background temperature are
important conditions for excess heat production. The cell with sample Pd-A was put in a large
glass beaker only to prevent leakage of electrolyte onto the floor of the SEC; however, the
low concentration of H2SO4 (5wt.% is one-fourth that the used ordinarily) in Table I of Ref. [4]
and high current in Table II here ensure the high temperature of electrolyte, and hence
excess power was observed. This suggests that every method which increases electrolyte
temperature will be favorable for excess heat production. But this does not mean that lowering
the SEC wall temperature and installing good heat insulation around the cell will increase
excess power. We have conducted experiments at Twall = 15 C and let the steady-state
electrolyte temperature be close to that at Twall = 25 C, by packing more Styrofoam around
the cell with sample Pd-H; however, excess power did not change significantly. There are
other unknown parameters controlling the excess power.

After finding this key factor of excess heat production, we tested previously electrolyzed
samples Pd-B to Pd-D, from which it had previously been difficult to produce excess heat [4].
We found that this method was successful, as expected, as shown in Table III.

From September 2005 to October 2006, we have conducted electrochemical calorimetric
measurements of Pd|D2O+H2SO4 with 12 Pd samples and these samples all gave excess heat
using the method described above; the results are summarized in Table III.

In these samples, Pd-F consists of two pieces which are almost the same size; these were
placed in two cells connected in series. Sample Pd-H was cold rolled after each run of
electrolysis; the thickness changed from the original value, 0.5 mm to 0.03 mm as illustrated
in Table IV. It was found that excess power does not depend strongly on the sample thickness.
This may mean that excess heat is a surface effect rather than a volume effect as suggested
previously [7].

Sample Pd-I is a palladium tube. About 30 mm on one end was exposed to electrolyte
during electrolysis while the upper part was covered with PTFE heat-shrinkable tubing. The
anode is a concentric cylinder made of Pt foil with total area of 48 cm2. This cathode gave
maximum stable excess power of 356  11 mW at input power of 9.863 W during electrolysis
for 7 hours and 10 minutes in Exp. No. 060620. After electrolysis for 56 hours in this run, the
cell began producing heat bursts as shown in Fig. 2. The maximum heat burst is 1.1 W. The
full-width at half-maximum of the heat bursts ranges from 12 minutes at its first occurrence at
about 56 hours to 3.3 minutes at 110 hrs; the period of the heat bursts ranges from 3.3 hours to
a few minutes. Besides Pd-I, other samples also gave heat bursts as shown in Table III. It
seems that the largest heat bursts occur for thick samples. This conclusion is consistent with
the results of heat-after-death experiments [8,9] and with an experiment in which an explosion
occurred [10].

Fig. 2. Heat bursts and corresponding temperatures during electrolysis of sample
Pd-I, a Pd tube, in Exp. No. 060620.

A question of the excess heat in Pd|H2SO4+D2O is the role of protium ions. In order to
study this, we prepared heavy water electrolyte containing D2SO4 instead of H2SO4. The
D2SO4 is 99.5+ at.% pure (Aldrich Chemical Company). The ratio by volume of D2O:D2SO4
is 6.6:1, which is close to that of H2SO4 in D2O (volume ratio of D2O:H2SO4 is 6.7:1). Six
runs with samples Pd-D and Pd-E from Dec. 12, 2005 to Jan. 4, 2006 gave maximum excess
power of 115  20 mW for Pd-D and 124  54 mW for Pd-E, which are not greater than those
obtained with D2O + H2SO4 electrolyte. These results indicate the protium ion does not reduce
the excess heat production. Currently, we use 99 at.% purity D2O, not 99.9 at.% purityD2O
which we used previously; there has been no detectable difference in excess heat production.

Fig. 3. Comparison between SEC and isoperibolic calorimetry (Exp. No. 050928).
The graph on the left gives results obtained with the SEC. The average excess power
is 759  33 mW (without including mass loss) to 1,481  35 mW (including mass
losses of D2O and H2O, 0.62 and 1.09 g, respectively). The right graph shows
average temperatures from eight thermocouples attached on the outside of both the
Pd|D2O and the Pt|H2O cells. The input power of both cells is 9.60  0.03 W, the
applied current is 3 A for 7 hours and 30 minutes, the air temperature in SEC is 37 C
and the excess power of the E-cell is 716
339 783
 mW. The error of isoperibolic
calorimetry mainly comes from the uncertainty of the proportion of D2 (H2), O2, and
D2O (H2O) vapor which escape due to poor recombination by the catalyst and a
flexible seal between the cell body and its top. Increased pressure in the cell increases
the rate of escape of gases from the cell. The rate of mass loss from a cell, shown in
the data tables above, is a measure of the rate of escape of the gases.

In our experiments with H2SO4, the electrolyte was used for multiple runs. Only heavy
water (about 20 grams needed after 3 A  8 hrs electrolysis) was added to the old electrolyte
to restore it to the original volume. Because of this, the H+ concentration decreases with time
in every run and from run to run. This means that our cell is a deuterium self-concentrated
system and the isotopic purity of D2O has negligible effect on excess heat production.

Another question is the validity of excess power measured by isoperibolic calorimetry
which we reported previously [13]. Here we report the results of isoperibolic calorimetry
and SEC obtained with the same electrolytic system. As described before [13], we used two
cells with the same dimensions, one containing Pd|D2O+H2SO4 and another containing
Pt|H2O+H2SO4. The concentration of H2SO4 in each cell is adjusted to ensure that the voltages
and hence the input powers of these two cells are close to each other at the same current.
These two cells are placed in a cardboard box (14  17  17.5 cm3, 4 mm wall thickness)
inside the SEC. Temperatures, current, voltages and the SEC signal are recorded with a data
acquisition system. The results are shown in Fig. 3. We find that these two methods give the
same excess power, within the precision of the measurements. This suggests that excess
power results reported before [13] are likely to be accurate.


III. Scanning electron microscope and energy dispersive spectrometer characterization

III. 1. Silver: Before and after electrolysis, we characterized the surface morphology and elemental
composition of Pd cathodes by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive
spectrometry (EDS). Most of samples show anomalous new element production [14]. We
will report results of one sample, Pd-H, whose parameters are shown in Table IV. The photo
of sample Pd-H after electrolysis for 186 hours is shown in Fig. 4, the electrode bends
towards the anode during long time electrolysis as observed previously [4]. The fractures on
the right edge of the convex side in Fig. 4(a) (or left edge of concave side in Fig. 4(b)) were
formed during cold rolling, before electrolysis. The numbered white labels are areas studied
by SEM and EDS.

Fig. 4. Photos of Pd cathode H after electrolysis for 186 hours. (a) (left) The convex side,
which faced away from the anode; (b) (right) the concave side, which faced the anode.
The hole is used to connect the cathode lead wire as described in Ref. [4]. The white
rectangles indicate the positions from which X-ray spectra were taken.

Fig. 5. SEM picture of region #16 in Fig. 4(a). SEM No.WS060505Pd-H-CV-i16-2kX.

Fig. 6. Characteristic X-ray spectra of spot #8 (a), spot #1 (b) and square area (c)
shown in Fig. 5.

Fig. 5 shows an SEM picture of region #16 in Fig. 4(a). Three characteristic X-ray
spectra from this region are shown in Fig. 6. Fig 6(a) is from spot #8 in Fig. 5. The most
prominent peaks in the spectrum are from Pd, the bulk metal. Other elements are from the
electrolytic system: Pt is from the anode, which is slowly dissolved and deposited on the
cathode; C most likely comes from back-streaming of hydrocarbons from the diffusion pump
oil; Al and O are from the alumina recombination catalyst; and Ti is from the electrolyte. Ti
was dissolved in the electrolyte before the experiments [35].

Fig. 6(b) is from spot #1, the most prominent element here is silver; other elements are the
same as those in Fig. 6(a), except for the absence of Pd. Besides spot #1, other spots in the
central black region of the foot-shaped feature in Fig. 5 are almost pure silver. We obtained
the EDS spectrum in Fig. 6(c) from the central region in Fig. 5. Because the characteristic Lα
X-ray of Ag is at 2.98 keV, it overlaps with Pd L at 2.99 keV. The expected intensity ratio of
Pd L/Pd L is 0.42, whereas the ratio of these two peaks in Fig. 6(c) exceeds 1.0. As in our
previous reports [25], we attribute the increase in this ratio to the presence of silver. The
results of analysis of the EDS spectra are summarized in Table VI. The silver concentration is
presented as a relative quantity for the convenience of comparison. Localized concentrations
of silver were also detected along cracks in the microstructure shown in Fig. 5. Because of
their irregular nature, these cracks probably formed during electrolysis rather than during cold
rolling. These cracks also have localized concentrations of silver.

Another example is shown in Fig. 7 and Table VII. 

Fig. 7, SEM picture of region # 12 in Fig. 4(a). SEM No.WS060504Pd-H-CV-i12-150X.

Fig. 8. SEM picture of region # 3 in Fig. 4(a). SEM No.WS060501Pd-H-CV-i3-500X.

The most common finding is that silver occurs in craters, such as those shown in Fig. 8.
These craters with rims almost certainly formed during electrolysis. Pt deposition was
concentrated on these protruding rims. We measured the silver concentration with different
accelerating voltages and at different times. The results in Table VIII show that there are no
obvious changes in silver concentration due to either the increase in accelerating voltage or to
the passage of time.

Fig. 9. SEM picture of crater at another time. SEM No.WS060607Pd-H-CC-i2-2kX.

We have studied the crater shown in Fig. 9 in detail as listed in Table IX. This crater is also
located on an edge on the concave side of the same sample. From these results it is concluded
that the silver concentration varies by about a factor of 5 from the lowest in spot 5 to the
highest in spot 1.

The silver concentration in all 19 regions in Fig. 4(a) is summarized in Table X.
Concentrations labeled P were obtained with the electron beam fixed in one spot on the
cathode, and A designates concentrations obtained with the electron beam scanning a known
area of the cathode. The silver production on the concave side in Fig. 4(b) is summarized in
Table XI.

Besides the H sample Pd cathode, silver was also detected on other samples, as reported
before [4].

Some conclusions can be reached concerning the location of silver on the cathode after
electrolysis: (1) Silver occurs preferentially around the sample edges rather than in the central
area, as observed before [16]; (2) silver is found more frequently on the back (convex) side
of the Pd cathode than on the side facing the anode (concave side). Of course, there is another
possibility: the silver on the concave side was covered by a Pt deposition layer, which is
thicker than that on the convex side.

III.2. Nickel: Another anomalous element is nickel, which was detected in regions # 2 and #3 in Fig. 4(b). The SEM picture, X-ray spectrum of spot #1, and EDS measurement results from region #2 are shown in
Figs. 10 and 11, and Table XII, respectively, where Ni/(Pd+Ni+Ag) from different spots ranges from 0.9 to 2.1 at.%. The average value for the whole area is Ni/(Pd+Ni) = 1.3 at.%. Region #3 in Fig. 4
(b) also contains nickel, Ni/(Pd+Ni) = 1.1 to 1.9 at.% , in various spots. The nickel is concentrated in the upper left corner on concave side of the Pd-H sample. For example, Ni is not present in any of the
spectra in Fig. 6. We also have observed Ni, on the order of 1 at.% or less, in other samples.

Fig. 10. SEM picture of region #2 in Fig. 4(b). SEM No. WS060424Pd-H-CC-i2-150X

What is the origin of this nickel? Ni was listed as “not detected” in the chemical analysis
provided by the vendor of the Pd foil. It is very unlikely to have resulted from the cold rolling
process or from electrodeposition because it is highly localized near one corner of the cathode.
If it is the result of either contamination from the rolling mill or from electroplating it should
not be highly localized on only one corner of the cathode. It could not have resulted from
SEM systems because the stainless steel components of the SEM chamber also contain Fe and
Cr. Fe and/or Cr are not present in any of the spectra. The SEM does not have components
made of pure Ni. Therefore, the origin of the Ni is not known.


IV. Discussion

Since the discovery of excess heat in 1989 [11], the reproducibility has been a difficult
problem [7]. Our results suggest a reason why Fleischmann and Pons and other groups
observed excess heat using Dewar-type electrolytic cells and isoperibolic calorimetry
[8,1113], but some groups using mass-flow calorimetry, had difficulty detecting excess heat,
or the reproducibility was very poor. The reason is that the latter method involves a low temperature, semi-isothermal measurement. The temperature difference between the electrolytic cell and the water
flowing during electrolysis is very small. Therefore, this system has to be stimulated by various methods, e.g., high input power, laser irradiation etc. [7] Even then, the reproducibility is still low because
the cell temperature is not high enough.

Our experiments using small diameter Pd tubes as cathodes produced many more heat bursts than flat Pd foil cathodes. Further study using Pd tube cathodes is warranted.
Using an EDS attached to a SEM; we again have found localized concentrations of silver on the surfaces of Pd cathodes after electrolysis. On a few of the cathodes, we also found localized
concentrations of nickel. Further study, such as the determination of isotopic ratios before and after electrolysis, is needed to aid in understanding the origin of the Ag and Ni.


References

1. Ambadkar A. and Dash J., Electrolysis of D2O with a palladium cathode compared with electrolysis of H2O with a platinum electrode: procedure and experimental details, see:
http://www.newenergytimes.com/Library/2003DashJ-ColdFusionRecipe.pdf
2. Dash J. and Ambadkar A., Proc. ICCF11, Marseille, France, Oct 31 to Nov 5, 2004, P. 477.
3. Wang Q. and Dash J., Proc. ICCF12, Yokohama, Japan, Nov 27 to Dec 5, 2005, P. 140.
4. Zhang W.-S. Dash J. and Wang Q., Proc. ICCF12, Yokohama, Japan, Nov 27 to Dec 5, 2005, P. 86.
5. Dash J., Noble G. and Diman D., Trans. Fusion Tech., 1994, V.26, No.4T, P.299.
6. Miguet S. and Dash J., J. New Energy, 1996, V.1, P.23.
7. Storms E., Infinite Energy, 1998, V.4, No.21, P.16.
8. Pons S. and Fleischmann M., Trans. Fusion. Tech., 1994, V.26, No.4T, P.87.
9. Rothwell J., Cold Fusion and the Future, 2004, lenr-canr.org. P.13.


