1

It is well known that the truth of cold fusion has been discredited or ignored in the science world since its infancy
until now. Obviously, the poor reproducibility of cold fusion
experiments is mostly to blame for this widespread, longlasting denial. However, there is another important reason:
the fact that the arbitrary refusal or neglect by most of the
skeptics has prevented them from realizing and reconsidering new findings and progress made by the cold fusioners.
While they remained on the sidelines, a new paradigm of
science and technology has developed along with the evolution of cold fusion research. This has monumental significance regarding the explanation and understanding of cold
fusion. It was their clinging and depending on the old paradigm, their ignorance and refusal to acknowledge the new
paradigm that trapped cold fusion R&D in so many scientific and political difficulties. The history of cold fusion
includes the failure of the old paradigm, and the development and success of the new one. The author deeply feels an
obligation to write this article to present to the scientific
community this paradigm, with the fervent wish that cold
fusion will be re-evaluated with a more objective attitude
rather than shunned away without the due responsibility,
even in a time when the experimental facts are not yet clear
and theoretical explanations vary.

Differences between cold fusion and hot fusion are summarized in Table I. The most important difference is the temperature. The working temperature of cold fusion is from
ambient (the characteristic energy is 0.03 eV) to 200°C (0.05
eV). Even in gas-discharge or beam-target systems, the particle energy is only a few keV. These temperatures or energies
are 6 orders less than the hot fusion values, which is on the
order of 100 MK (10 keV) for D-T fusion, the easiest nuclear
fusion.

There is an analogy between nuclear fusion and chemical
reactions. Hot fusion resembles an inorganic chemical reaction. Increasing temperature and pressure to extremely high
values are traditional procedures to accelerate reaction rates.
Cold fusion is similar to a biochemical reaction, the reaction
rate of which is modified through choice of catalyst
(enzyme), control of the pH, and other subtle conditions.
This similarity is also embodied in the spectrum of products.
Hot fusion products are simple, e.g. the ashes of D-T fusion
are helium and neutron, in addition to tritium and proton
for D-D fusion. The products of cold fusion are more complicated—they range from helium (the product of D-D
fusion),1 silver (the product of a reaction involving a palladium cathode),2 to praseodymium and molybdenum (products of multi-body reaction involving surface additives, i.e.
Cs + 4D → Pr, Sr + 4D → Mo),3 and many sorts of nucleons
with Miley-type spectra4 even for the Pd-D system, the original and simplest one in this field. Product spectra depend
on reactants, temperature, impurities and other conditions
not clear yet today. The way these elements affect the reaction rate is something like the way yeasts affect the flavor of
wine during brewing, i.e. different yeasts give different
tastes. Another merit of cold fusion is that the nuclear products are stable nucleons only with trace amount of tritium
(in ppb order) and neutron (in ppt order); this is in contrast
to the radioactive nucleons, charged particles, neutrons or γ
rays in hot fusion or nuclear fission. The green and safety
nature of cold fusion is similar to that of biochemistry too.
And these also are the trend of R&D of modern chemical
engineering, materials and renewable energy.

Another remarkable feature of cold fusion is on engineering and organizing. Hot fusion requires the involvement of
many scientists and technicians from various backgrounds
cooperating together for one purpose, as done in the
Manhattan Project seven decades ago or the Apollo Project
four decades ago. A hot fusion reactor is always a huge
device with complicated design. Its operation depends on
orders from the central control system. Its electrical supply,
radiation protection and daily maintenance must be carefully arranged and strictly executed. It is no surprise that this
sort of system has inherent fragility similar to that of a fission plant (e.g., the Chernobyl reactor in Ukraine) or a big
dam (e.g., Three Gorges Dam in China). Geological and
meteorological disasters, management defects and wars all
may result in the sudden interruption or breakdown of the
regional electricity supply, or even horrible disasters such as
happened before. In a word, big plants make for big trouble.

For cold fusion, all of these issues are no longer problems.
Its small scale makes the operation, management and commercialization very easy by comparison. The cooperation in
R&D of cold fusion depends only on the free will of
researchers and manufacturers. Application of cold fusion
will be similar to that of solar and wind energies, i.e. every
family, community or office will be the consumer and manufacturer at the same time; and the electrical system will be
the network structure, in which trouble in any unit does not
affect the stability of the overall system. In light of this, it is
reasonable to conclude that hot fusion is the technology of
the industrial era and cold fusion will be the technology of
the web era.

The technical, administrative and commercial characteristics of these two types of fusion will determine the fate of
their futures: hot fusion vs. cold fusion in the energy market
will be similar to the story of the Iridium Satellite
Constellation vs. the Global System for Mobile communications (GSM) in the wireless communication market, which
happened about one decade ago.

Because hot fusion falls away from the evolving direction
of modern science, technology, society and economy, the
author is sure that this Cold War’s sci-tech plot has no
future. Its end is only a matter of time and price, i.e. human
beings (specifically governments of some large countries)
will not pay much more money on this dead technology.
This technology will not be the first loser. Similar examples
were the Analog High-Definition Television Project5 and the
Robot Project6 in Japan. The phenomenological reasons for
these two lessons were the mistakes of industrial decisionmaking; the deep reason was the limitation of sci-tech paradigm at that time.

The terms low energy nuclear reaction (LENR) and condensed matter nuclear science (CMNS) are gradually being
accepted to replace cold fusion in describing the related phenomena in a broader sense. As a scientific field, LENR differs
from classical nuclear reactions in many ways, as listed in
Table I and especially in Table II. First of all, beam interactions with target are the classic method to study nuclear
physics and particle physics since Rutherford established the
planetary model of the atom by electron backscattering. As
the research in these fields evolve, beam energies become
higher and higher, accelerators grow bigger and
bigger, seemingly with no end in sight. A sidenote
of this mode is the term high energy physics,
which has the same meaning as particle physics. A
sharp contrast hence occurs, i.e. only the maximum accelerator on earth can be used to study the
physical processes in the minimum scale in the
universe. The explanatory fact is that some accelerators and their accessories are bigger than the
extent of small cities, and building a new accelerator is a tremendous undertaking both economically and politically. However, the discovery of
LENR interrupted this big-small mode. It needs
only a tabletop device rather than town-size buildings to achieve the high energy process. The truth
that a mini-size device produces something much
larger than expected is unprecedented. For example, pyroelectric fusion can achieve D-D fusion
with a temperature difference of only 40°C,7 and
laser wakefield can accelerate electrons to GeV
(109 eV) on a scale of centimeters.8 LENR is the
leading method in this new tide of discoveries,
although many scientists, especially physicists, do
not understand that now. This wave is not only
revolutionary but also as progressive as that which
happened in the information industry, e.g. electronic storage and publication will end the ever
growing need for library buildings. LENR will start
a new era: an amateur can carry out particle experiments in his/her garage; national laboratories or
research universities will not be the kings in high
energy physics. Physics will begin far away from
politics, thus ending their close relationship
which was formed in World War II. This process
also resembles the development of computers: the
personal computer has replaced the workstation
and mainframe computer as the mainstream; individuals and families rather than enterprises and
governments have become the main customers.

Because nuclear reactions take place in scales
below fm (10-15 m), while angstrom (10-10 m) and
above are the scale of chemical reactions, nuclear
reactions release/absorb energies from 1 to 102
MeV, while the chemical energy is around 1 eV, the irrelevance of chemical environments is the essential feature of
nuclear reaction. In contrast to classical nuclear reactions,
LENR depends not only strongly on temperature and reactant concentrations etc., as in chemistry but also on sample
pretreatments as in metallurgy as discussed above. It means
that the multi-scale coupling (from 10-10 m to 10-15 m)
occurs in LENR. This coherent feature is same as that in
nano-science and biological engineering, and LENR is far
ahead in this direction.

Although nuclear reactions are quantum phenomenon,
the key discipline of hot fusion is plasma physics, which is
confined in classical mechanics (Newton-Maxwell paradigm). The simplicity, stability and certainty are both the
basis and the purpose; complexity and instability should be
avoided as far as possible. For example, at least 50 destructive instabilities occur in Magnetic Confinement Fusion
(TOKAMAK)9; the Raleigh-Taylor instability is also fatal in
Inertial Confinement Fusion (ICF). In contrast, non-equilibrium and instability are the necessary condition for LENR.
The LENR mechanism is also related to the cooperative and
complicated interactions in condensed matter, although
exact processes are unknown today. These non-linear, nonequilibrium and complexity characteristics are the tendencies of modern science, e.g. chaos, dissipative structure, complex fluid (soft matter) and neuroscience, etc.

Two politics-science decisions can be cited as evidence of
the present viewpoint in some sense. One is the cancellation
of the Superconducting Super Collider project (SSC, $11 billion USD cost, $2 billion USD spent) in 1993.10 Another is
hot fusion. The largest thermonuclear reactor, International
Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER), planned as
early as in 1985, is now being constructed by China, Europe,
India, Japan, Korea, Russia and the USA. It will cost 11 billion Euro. A meaningful decision is that the U.S. Congress
passed a bill rejecting the payment of $149 million USD due
for the project in December 2007.11 Although most reviewers consider these two decisions as only finance issues, the
author considers them to be signals of failure of the old paradigm in modern society.

One scholar once commented that the cancellation of SSC
could be described as the extinction of a science dinosaur.
Without doubt, the ITER is the technology dinosaur in the
world now. The annihilation of dinosaurs on earth was
unavoidable. Biological evolution was faster after that. For
similar reasons, the dinosaurs of science and technology will
encounter economic and political difficulties sooner or later,
but human beings will not lose their ways to explore and utilize the nature. The problem with low energy nuclear reactions is whether human beings are willing to suppress their
prejudices and learn what has been discovered during the
past 20 years.


References

1. Arata, Y. and Zhang, Y.-C. 1999. “Observation of
Anomalous Heat Release and Helium-4 Production from the
Highly Deuterated Palladium Fine Particles,” Jpn. J. Appl.
Phys., 38, L774.
2. Zhang, W.-S. and Dash, J. 2007. “Excess Heat
Reproducibility and Evidence of Anomalous Elements After
Electrolysis in Pd|D2O+H2SO4 Electrolytic Cells,” Proc.
ICCF13, Dagomys, Sochi, Russia, June 25-July 1, pp. 202-216.
3. Iwamura, Y., Sakano, M., and Itoh, T. 2002. “Elemental
Analysis of Pd Complexes: Effects of D2 Gas Permeation,”
Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 41, 1A, 4642.
4. Miley, G.H. 1996. “Quantitative Observation of
Transmutation Products Occurring in Thin-film Coated
Microspheres During Electrolysis,” Proc. ICCF6, Hokkaido,
Japan, October 13-16, p. 629.
5. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Analog_high-definition_
television_system
6. http://search.japantimes.co.jp/member/member.html?nn
20030820b8.htm
7. Naranjo, B., Gimzewski, J.K., and Putterman, S. 2005.
“Observation of Nuclear Fusion Driven by a Pyroelectric
Crystal,” Nature, 434, 1115.
8. Leemans, W.P., Nagler, B., Gonsalves, A.J., Toth, C.,
Nakamura, K., Geddes, C.G.R., Esarey, E., Schroeder, C.B.,
and Hooker, S.M. 2006. “GeV Electron Beams from a
Centimetre-scale Accelerator,” Nature Physics, 2, 696.
9. http://en.wikilib.com/wiki/Instability#Plasma_instabilities
10. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Superconducting_Super_
Collider
11. http://physicsworld.com/cws/article/news/32312