1. Introduction

Since anomalous heat was announced by Fleischmann and Pons [1], there has been a great deal of research on Pd/D
electrolytic systems [2]. Some explosions in various types of electrolytic cells have been reported [3–6]. The accident
at SRI International was the most famous one; it was determined that this explosion was probably caused by deuterium
and oxygen recombination [3]. However, data from explosions occurring in other labs indicate that some rapid exothermic reactions rather than chemical processes induced these phenomena [4–6]. In a previous paper, we summarized
three explosions in our Pd/D electrolytic experiments which occurred in April 1991 [4]. After similar events take place
again and again [5,6], it becomes incumbent upon a researcher to pay attention and analyze the results in detail. We
did this and found some interesting features, which are presented here.


2. Electrolytic Cell and Explosions

The electrolytic system included a measuring cylinder with spout and foot (φout25.5× φin23×186 mm3, 77 m1, made
of simple glass, not heat-resistant glass); ∼ 0.4 M LiOD heavy water electrolyte (∼ 39 m1 of D2O with 0.3 wt.% of
6LiD, ∼ 9.4 cm of liquid height); a Pd tubea (φout 1.67 × φin 1.07 × 80 mm3, 0.103 cm3, Aout = 4.20 cm2, 1.3 g)
cathode with the bottom end open, connected to a Ti wire lead inserted at the top end and mechanically clamped; a
Pt mesh anode with a Pt wire lead, a round rubber plug platform holding the electrodes (φtop 27 × φbottom 21 × 22
mm3, 15.5 g) being inserted about 12 mm into the measuring cylinder for sealing, except a blowhole (∼ φ 3 mm) to
allow gas to escape freely, as shown in Fig. 1. Both the cathode and anode were immersed in the electrolyte before
electrolysis. The cell was placed in a 1-liter glass beaker filled with 530 ml of light water, with the water level about
10 cm; the bath beaker was covered with a plastic annular lid. A thermometer was fixed at the lid; the sensor head of
the thermometer was approximately halfway between the sidewalls of the electrolytic cell and bath beaker, and 2 cm
above the beaker bottom, as shown in Fig. 1. The room temperature in the early morning of this season was 22◦C; we
will set this value as the bath temperature just before the explosion, because the record of the temperature was lost.

Three explosions happened in this Pd/D electrolytic system in April 1991. In these explosions, the rubber plug
with the electrodes in it flew off about 1.5–3 m away, and electrical wires and alligator clips used to connect the DC
power to the cell were left on the lab table. The ankle of cell broke as illustrated in Fig. 2. D2O in the cell mixed
with H2O in the bath in the last caseb. Because nobody was present at the scene of any of the explosions, there was no
direct observation on any case except the last one having some records later as described below.

In the last event, the potentiostatic electrolysis with cell voltage of 7.5 V had continued for more than 50 h before
the explosion. The applied current at the 50th hour of electrolysis was 0.26 A (or 62 mA cm−2), which was slightly
less than at the start. Voltage, current and bath temperature were manually recorded every hour and they were stable
before the explosion. An experimenter (Da-Lun Wang) left the lab after the data recording at the 50th hour and came
back half an hour later; the explosion took place during this period. It was found that the bath temperature had risen
by 5◦C. The rubber plug and the attached electrodes flew 2–3 m away and fell onto the floor. At the same time, one
area in the middle-upper part of the Pd tube bulged out but the backside of this protruding section was not concave
and the electrode was still as straight as before. This means this damage was not caused by any external force after
the explosion but by an internal cause during the process. It was believed that the first two explosions were weaker
than the last one because the cell remained intact and it only fell against the sidewall of the bath beaker in the first two.
After these two cases, the plug was pressed firmly into the cell and this gave rise to a more violent explosion the third
time. The last event will be discussed in detail.


3. Explosion Analysis

Firstly, we estimate the effect of electrolysis on thermal behaviors of this system. It is easy to determine that about
4.4 ml or 4.9 g of heavy water (a column of water in the cell ∼ 1.1 cm high) was consumed after 50 h of electrolysis;
the height of electrolyte level in the cell was, therefore, 8.3 cmc. The heating power of electrolysis just before the
explosion was: P = I × (U − 1.53 V)=1.55 W, where 1.53 V is the thermoneutral potential for D2O electrolysis.
The temperature difference across the cell wall was:
∆T = Pt/κS = 0.32◦C $ 5◦C, where t = 0.125 cm, the thickness of glass sidewall; κ = 9 mW cm−1 K−1, thermal conductivity of glass; S = 66 cm2,
the conduction area of the sidewall with the height of electrolyte level (8.3 cm). Therefore, the electrolysis power did
not heat up the cell to a significant temperature rise before the explosion.

Based on the above conclusion and temperature measurement, the minimum excess energy released before the
explosion would be the absorption heat of 530 ml of water and 34.6 ml of heavy water with a 5◦C temperature rise:
∆Q = 12 kJ. The heat dissipation after the explosion is omitted here.

Secondly, a simulation test conducted after the explosion showed that it takes 2.1 kgf to blow out the plug. This
corresponds to an excess pressure ∆p = 0.5 bar. That is to say, the minimum pressure in the gas column of the cell was
1.5 bar just before the explosion. Four possible situations might lead to such high pressure and explosion; we consider
the first three of them trivial:

(1) Blowout of sealed cell. Provided the system was completely closed due to a mistake in the assembly process
before electrolysis, the cell would explode due to inner pressure increasing. However, it would only have
needed 7 min to attain the pressure of 1.5 bar, not the 50 h it actually took. Furthermore, the blowhole of the
cell was clean without any deposit of solute. There was no process which could seal the cell during electrolysis
and heat up the bath water effectively; therefore, the possibility that the cell was sealed can be excluded.

(2) Chemical explosion by D2 + O2 recombination. The volume of the gas column above the electrolyte in the
cell head space just before the explosion was 38 cm3, the related heat production ∆Qchem can be calculated
using the optimal D2/O2 mixing ratio: D2 +1/2O2 = D2O + 294.6 kJ mol−1, ∆Qchem = 0.31 kJ, which is much less than the actual value 12 kJ and could not heat up the bath water too.
The following discussion also rules out the explosive recombination because the steam flow purged the D2+O2
mix. Therefore the real explosion could not be caused by any chemical reaction.

(3) Short-circuit of electrodes. This possibility can be excluded for three reasons. Firstly, the electrode leads were
hard wires and connections of lead-electrode were strong; a short-circuit could not happen during electrolysis.
Secondly, unlike what happens with utility AC power, a short-circuit of DC power would change the constantvoltage mode to the constant-current mode, and the supplied power would be lower than before; therefore, the
heating power in the cell could not rise. Thirdly, even if the DC power supplied the cell with the maximum
output power (e.g. several tens of watts), it could not reach 5.1–5.5 kW of thermal power, which is the amount
deduced below.

(4) Heat burst in the Pd tube cathode. Because these prosaic reasons cannot explain the explosion, the only
likely explanation was that a heat burst of low energy nuclear reactions (cold fusion) took place in the tube
cathode; the released energy heated the heavy water to the boiling point and high vapor pressure developed in
a short time; the vapor could not escape the cell effectively and the explosion occurred.

We can estimate that the minimum temperature rise in the cell just before the explosion was 75◦C using parameters
of the excess energy ∆Q = 12 kJ and the remaining electrolyte volume of 34.6 ml, provided the excess heat only
transferred to the bath water of 530 ml (in other words, we assume it was adiabatic). Based on the initial temperature
22◦C, the electrolyte would be greater than 97◦C, very close to the boiling point of heavy water, 101◦C. This also
indicates that the electrolyte was boiling during the explosion.

The boiling point of heavy water is 113◦C at a pressure of 1.5 bar [7]d; the vapor density ρ = 0.966 mg cm−3 and
vaporization heat ∆H = 2012 J g−1 correspondingly. Based on Bernoulli’s law, the steam velocity escaping through
the cell’s blowhole in such conditions is
νhole = 2∆p/ρ = 330 m s−1. This value is close to the speed of sound in air. The explosive power can be estimated by two methods: one is the
kinetic calculation described previously [4] and the other is a thermal transfer analysis here.

There are two limits, one is the adiabatic approximation, i.e. the excess heat was produced so fast that the heat loss
was only carried by the steam across the blowhole; the corresponding power is Pad = πφ2 1ρνhole/4*∆HT0→T.

The first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (5) is similar to Eq. (3) except ∆HT0→T (2.246 J g−1) being replaced with
the vaporization heat ∆H (2 012 J g−1) at 113◦C and 1.5 bar, it is 4.5 kW. The second term on the right-hand side of
Eq. (5) is the cell’s convection heat loss on the outer surface of sidewall immersed in water with area A = 80 cm2, T
= 113◦C and T0 = 22◦C. α is the heat transfer factor: α = cRan α/h , where the constants c and n depend on the magnitude of Rayleigh number Ra [9]:
Ra = gβ(T − T0)h3/να
with the gravitational acceleration g = 979.75 cm s−2, the height h = 10 cm and water’s parameters at temperature of
(T + T0)/2 [10,11]: the thermal expansion coefficient β = 5.61 × 10−4 K−1, the kinematic viscosity ν = 4.32 × 10−3
cm2 s−1, the thermal conductivity λ = 6.65 mW cm−1 K−1 and the thermal diffusivity α = 1.62 × 10−3 cm2 s−1. We
obtain the Rayleigh number Ra = 7.3 × 109. The corresponding constant are c = 0.1 and n = 1/3 for 109 < Ra < 1013
[9]. The heat transfer factor is α = 0.129 W cm−2 K−1 and the convection power in water is 960 W. On the other hand,
the convection power in air is only 0.3 W and radiation power is only 11 W, we neglect them consequently. Therefore
the thermal power just before the explosion under the isothermal approximation is
Piso = 4.5+0.96 ≈ 5.5 kW.

These two different estimations give close amplitudes of explosion intensity; the actual power should be a value
between these two approximations
P = 5.1 to 5.5 kW.
The explosion power density is
P/Vd = 50 to 53 kW cm−3 Pd, where VPd = 0.103 cm3, the volume of Pd tube. Of course, this is only the minimum amplitude provided that the
rate of anomalous reaction was uniform in the whole sample. Because of the localization characteristic of excess heat
production as observed that one area of the Pd tube being strongly distorted after the explosion (see Section 2), the
actual power density should be much greater than the value in Eq. (10). Considering the reaction region was confined
in a length equal to the diameter of the Pd tube, the corresponding volume is 2.2 × 10−3 cm3, then the local explosive
power density is P/VPd.local = 2.3 to 2.5 MW cm−3 Pd.

Of course, the above values only characterize the explosive phase. It needs time to warm the cell from the bath
temperature to the boiling point; we can estimate the lower limit of time for excess heat accumulation from total heat
and the explosion power with the adiabatic approximation t > ∆Q/Pad = 2.4 s. 

However, the electrolyte would boil away under this high power in a short time; we can estimate the time to boil dry is
tdryout = m∆HT0→T/Pad= 17 s with m = 38 g, the mass of electrolyte at 50 h of electrolysis. This means that a high power in the order of kilowatts
could not continue for tens of seconds; otherwise, the cell would dry out and explosion would not occur. The time of
thermal run-away should be 2.4 s < trun-away < 17 s.

Referring to Mizuno’s explosion [5], the developing time of cell’s temperature increase from the ambient value to the
boiling point was only ∼ 17 s. It seems the corresponding time in our cases also is in the same order of magnitude.

The upper limit of incubation time should be half an hour as described in Section 2. Using this time scale, we
obtain the lower limit of excess power is 6.7 W or 430% of input power, the corresponding power density is
P¯/Vd = 65 W cm−3 Pd.


4. Discussion

We can reconstruct the explosion process based on the above analysis. We can infer that the explosive process was
probably caused by low energy nuclear reactions. At first, one local region of Pd tube electrode met some unknown
criteria to produce intense cold fusion. The exothermic reaction released energy and heated up the cathode and the
surrounding electrolyte. The positive feedback between temperature and reaction rate promoted the excess power
to increase exponentially with time. After about ten seconds, the excess power was so great that the temperature
at the nuclear reaction region (< 1 mm3) of Pd tube rose to more than one thousand Celsius degrees and the metal
lattice distorted strongly as observed afterwards due to thermo-stresses; the surrounding heavy water vaporized, and the
electrolyte boiled. When the excess power was so high that the cell produced steam which could not escape through the
cell’s blowhole efficiently, the inner pressure rose rapidly and exceeded the threshold value, 1.5 bar. At that moment,
the excess power reached 5.1–5.5 kW. The explosion followed: The plug was ejected, the D2O temperature dropped
instantly from 113 to 101◦C, the ankle of cell was broken due to thermo-stresses in the wall of cell as illustrated in
Fig. 2. All three of these processes happened at almost the same time, so we will not deal with them separately. The
remaining electrolyte in the cracked cell mixed with the water in the bath and the mixture’s temperature rose by 5◦C. It
must be pointed out that because some hot heavy water escaped in the form of vapor as shown in Eqs. (3) and (5), the
value of 12 kJ is an underestimate of the actual energy release. On the other hand, although the D2O bubbles probably
ejected liquid out of the cell, which might fall back in the water bath; however, this effect only slightly modified the
overall heat of 12 kJ, but it did not qualitatively changed the conclusion.

When we review this explosion 24 years later, it reveals more details that were omitted at that time.

Firstly, the system was operated at a current density of 62 mA cm−2, which was lower than the well known
threshold value of 100–150 mA cm−2 for excess heat production [2]. Excess heat at low current densities of 44–
53 mA cm−2 were also reported by one of the authors 9 years after this explosion [12]. These facts indicate the
requirement of current density for excess heat production may be lower than previously thought.

Secondly, although the loading ratio of deuterium in the cathode was not measured in this experiment, the D/Pd was
probably not high for two reasons: (i) The current density applied here was less than in most cold fusion experiments
that produce excess heat; (ii) The tube cathode had only the outer surface polarized during electrolysis. The inner
surface had much low current density due to deuterium gas formation and high resistance of electrolyte in the tube.
This means that deuterium absorbed on the outer surface would be desorbed on the inner surface. Therefore, the
loading ratio of deuterium in the tube electrode was probably less than that of a solid electrode with the same area of
outer surface. These facts may indicate that the threshold value of the loading ratio for excess heat production is not a
necessary condition as reported later [12].

After these explosions, a video recorder was installed to monitor the electrolytic cell and obtain more information
on explosions. However, no explosion ever occurred after that.

Obviously, the explosion here is similar to that in a W–H2O electrolytic system observed by Mizuno [5]. The same
features are the prominent excess heat and probably the rapid development time.

There was also an explosion in a Pd/D electrolytic system at SRI International [3]. Because it was a closed system
and parameters are complex, we cannot reach a clear conclusion as here. Biberian reported the explosion in a similar
open Pd tube/D electrolytic cell at low current [6]; we tend to conclude this was the same event as we experienced.


References

[1] M. Fleischmann, S. Pons and M. Hawkins, J. Electroanal. Chem. 261 (1989) 301; errata, J. Electroanal. Chem. 263 (1989)
187.
[2] E. Storms, The Science of Low Energy Nuclear Reaction, World Scientific, Singapore, 2007.
[3] S.I. Smedley, S. Crouch-Baker, M.C.H. McKubre and F.L. Tanzella, Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Cold Fusion, Nagoya, Japan, Oct.
21–25, 1992; Frontiers of Cold Fusion, H. Ikegami (Ed.), Universal Academy Press, Tokyo, Japan, 1993, p. 139.
[4] X.-W. Zhang, W.-S. Zhang, D.-L. Wang, S.-H. Chen, Y.-B. Fu, D.-X. Fan and W.-J. Chen, Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Cold Fusion,
Nagoya, Japan, Oct. 21–25, 1992; Frontiers of Cold Fusion, (H. Ikegami (Ed.), Universal Academy Press, Tokyo, Japan,
1993, p. 381.
[5] T. Mizuno and Y. Toriyabe, Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Cold Fusion, Yokohama, Japan, Nov. 27–Dec. 2, 2005; Condensed Matter
Nuclear Science, A. Takahashi, K.-I. Ota and Y. Iwamura, (Eds.), World Scientific, Singapore, 2006, p. 65.
[6] J.-P. Biberian, J. Condensed Matter Nucl. Sci. 2 (2009) 1.
[7] http://nuclear.ntua.gr/apache2-default/codes/heavy_calculus.html.
[8] M.H. Miles, H.D. Arman, J.D. Carrick, C.K. Gren, K.A. Haggerty, H.Y. Kim, A.G. Ky, J.E. Markham, C.F. Meeks and D.E.
Noga, Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Cold Fusion, Beijing, May19–24, 2002, p. 246.
[9] C.Y. Warner and V.S. Arpaci, Int. J. Heat and Mass Transfer 11 (1968) 397.
[10] U. Grigull, J. Straub, P. Schiebener (Eds.), Steam Tables in SI Units, 2nd Edn., Springer, Berlin, 1984.
[11] http://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/water-thermal-properties-d_162.html
[12] Z.-L. Zhang, W.-S. Zhang, M.-H. Zhong and F. Tan, Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Cold Fusion, Lerici (La Spezia), Italy: Italian
Physical Society, Bologna, Italy, 2000, p. 91.