1. Introduction

Since the announcement of cold fusion by Fleishmann and Pons [1], there have been a lot of
research worldwide on the D/Pd system; some explosions in D/Pd systems especially in D/Pd
electrolytic systems have happened, the accident at SRI International [2] was a famous one. It
was suggested that explosion in the D/Pd system is caused by Oxygen/Deuterium recombination
[2]. In our D/Pd electrolytic experiments, three explosions occurred in April 1991. After
examining the remains of one of the explosions, we concluded that it was caused by cold fusion
in a Pd tube.


2. Electrolytic cell and explosion case

The electrolytic system included a glass measuring cylinder (out 25.5 in 23 186 mm, 80
m1), heavy water (39 m1), Pd tube (out1.67 in 0.67 80 mm) cathode and spire Pt wire
anode, a rubber plug of round platform (top 27 bottom 21 22 mm, 15.5 g) stretched in the
measuring cylinder about 12 mm and sealed the cell top except for a blowhole (3 mm,
allowing gas to escape, as shown in Fig. 1). The volume of gas in the headspace above the heavy
water in the cylinder was about 33.3 cm3
. The cell was placed in a water bath (530 ml light
water).

There were three explosions in these D/Pd electrolytic systems in April 1991. In two
explosions, the rubber plug with Pd tube and Pt wire flew off about 1.5 2 meters away, and the
bottom of cell was blown out; D2O in cell had been mixed with H2O in the bath. Because no one
was present at the scene of explosion, direct observation was impossible. But the temperature of
the water in the bath was measured within a half hour after one explosion, and it was found to
have risen by 5C. The electrolysis had continued about 50 hours with 7.5 V of cell voltage and
0.26 A of electrolytic current before the explosion.


3. Explosion analysis

Firstly, a 5C temperature rise of 530 ml water need absorb heat: Q = 1.1 104
J at least
(heat dissipation after explosion is neglected).

Secondly, as a result of a simulation test, 2.1 kg of force is needed to cause the plug to fly off,
corresponding to excess pressure P = 5.1 104
Pa. That is to say, the minimum pressure in gas
cylinder of cell is 1.5 105 Pa. Because the electrolytic cell is an open system, the D2 and O2
gases produced in electrolysis can escape through the blowhole easily and the excess gas in cell
cannot accumulate, as a general rule. The only situation is that a lot of gas is produced in short
time () and high pressure is formed in cell. Therefore the gas cannot escape through the small
hole efficiently and the rubber plug is pushed out and flying off, the bottom of cell is blown out
in the resulting rocket action. Two possible situations can lead to this result: <1> D2+O2 recombination causes chemical explosion. Volume of gas above electrolyte in the
cell is 33.3 cm3, the heat production Q can be calculated using the optimal D2/O2 mixing ratio: D O D O 67.8 kcal Q = 281 J. This is much less than the actual heat.

We consider another extreme situation, the space above electrolyte in cell is filled with O2 gas
and it combines with D2 gas released from Pd tube in short time and forms water, the
corresponding heat is 843 J, it is only 1/13 of the actual heat and this kind of heat cannot heat up
electrolyte efficiently, so the real explosion cannot be caused by chemical reaction.

<2> Heat burst is caused by cold fusion in Pd tube. Lots of heat released makes the
temperature of Pd tube rise to thousands of degrees and the heavy water around it vaporizes
rapidly, the heavy water vapor raises the pressure in the cell rapidly, and the explosion occurs. 

We can estimate the upper limit of : L = L/V P where L = 8 cm (height of gas cylinder), P = 5.1 104 Pa, = 2.3 cm (inner diameter of the
cell), 1 = 0.3 cm (effective diameter of blowhole), 0 = 0.0009 g/cm3
(density of heavy water
vapor at 1 atm). The result is = 0.058 s. The energy production rate is: P P V, V = 0.147 cm3, is volume of Pd tube. The heat burst in the explosion reached MW per cm3 Pd.

There was also an explosion in a D/Pd electrolytic system at SRI International on January 2,
1992. Because it was a closed system and the parameters are complex, we cannot reach a clear
conclusion on it as here, but it is possible that it was also a cold nuclear fusion explosion.


4. A proposal for mechanism of cold fusion

Where such large excess heat comes from? Why the heat mismatches nuclear products? It is
puzzle for us and very difficult to explain within the domain of the physical and chemical
knowledge now available, it is possible that new physics appears in it. Two years ago, the first
author of this paper provided a hypothesis as below [3].

A small part of the rest energy Mc2
connected with the rest mass M of deuterium can be
transformed directly into utilizable energy, this process named as RDTME can be written in the
form of
D D D D 1 2 3 4    
in which Di(i = 1 4) represents deuterons with rest Mi, and M M M M M M = (M1 + M2)c2
> 0 is the energy which can be released as the kinetic energy of electron,
deuterons and/or the energy of photon. It seems that the value of mainly distributes from order
of 1 eV to 20 keV.

The reaction mentioned above takes place only under certain specific artificial circumstances
with, especially, some kind of electronic screening. The condition under which F-P’s cold fusion
occurs is one of these specific artificial conditions.

Furthermore, we suggest a possible mechanism of excess heat released in RDTME model.

In PdDx, TiDx or other Deuterium/Metal system, when a free electron transits to a specific
state in which the electron can screen the coulomb repulsive force between two D nuclei, i.e. the
electron comes into a bound state, the photon may be emitted. Due to some possible yet
unknown relation between the electromagnetic interaction and the strong interaction, D nuclei
may provide energyMc2 connecting with its rest mass MD to the electron, then, the electron can
get back to the initial state and emit photon again. This process may repeat several times under
certain specific conditions, as a result, the excess heat is released continuously.

We divide the screen state involving electrons into two kinds: weak screen (w-s) and strong
screen (s-s). When the electrons transit to w-s state, only lower energy photons are emitted
without any traditional light nucleus fusion taking place. When the electrons transit to s-s state,
besides the energetic photons being emitted, various fusions of deuterium may sometimes be
ignited. Obviously, the probability that the electrons get into w-s state is much greater than that
the electrons get into s-s state, so the production of excess heat is much greater than that of the
nuclear particles. Therefore the puzzle of the huge mismatch between the excess heat and the
nuclear products is solved naturally. At the same time, we may understand the possible
correlation existing between the branching ratio of cold fusion and the temperature, pressure and
other environment parameters in the PdDx or other Deuterium/Metal Systems.

The screening effect existing between two deuterons caused by the mobile electrons and
deuterium ions D+
in the lattice of PdDx etc. have been discussed in many papers. This effect can
make the coulomb barrier weaker, and then may enhance, perhaps greatly, the probability of
fusion taking place between the low energy deuterons. But the screening mechanism has not yet
explained the mismatch between the excess heat and the fusion products as well as such large
fusion rate obtained in the experiments.

Similarly to the reaction in Eq. (1), the fusion reaction between protons and between proton
and deuteron can take place too. That is to say, the light-water-electrolysis can also generate the
excess heat in spite of small quantity.


References

[1] M. Fleishmann, S. Pons and M. Hawkins, J. Electroanal. Chem. 261 (1989) 301.
[2] New Scientist, January 11, 1992.
[3] X. Zhang et a1., Proc. 2nd International Conference on Cold Fusion, June 29 - July 4, 1991,
Como Italy



