Introduction

There may exist no process taking place anywhere in the universe without
heat generation. It must be admitted that an electrochemical process should be
accompanied by heat generation as well. Therein, the energy consumption (or
work dissipation), which is mostly dissipated in heat generation, is one of the important problems in electrochemical engineering which attracts the attention of
electrochemists. Many articles have been published about the heat generated
during the electrolysis process of heavy water (even light water!) since the article entitled 'Electrochemically induced nuclear fusion of deuterium' reported
by Fleischmann and Pons [1] appeared. This calorimetric study not only attracted scientists to explore that a nuclear process may be induced by such a
change in chemical conditions but also urged more and more electrochemical
engineers to investigate it with great interest. 

It was found that the work consumption as heat in the electrolysis of water,
during which the gases (H2 and 02) must be produced, absolutely depends on the
current density, (the cell voltage-essentially overvoltage) and the current efficiency [2-3]. In the electrolysis of water it is a typical irreversible process because gases are produced. It is necessary to investigate how the heat will be generated during the electrochemical process without gases being produced, such as
the electrorefining of a metal. 

The purpose of this work is to carry out calorimetric measurements during
the process of electrorefining copper and to find a correlation between the results of these measurements and the electrochemical conditions of the experiment. 


Experimental

Electrochemical cell:
The cell for electrorefining copper consists of a copper rod as axis, with coils
made of copper which wound around the rod, placed in a glass test tube filled with
copper sulphate solution, as shown in Fig. 1. The concentration of the solution is
about 5%. 

Fig. 1 Cross sectional view of the calorimetric chamber being placed in the electrorefining
cell and a calibration heater, 1 - calibration heater, 2 - calorimetric vessel, 3 - glass
cell, 4 - Cu rod and coils, 5 - electrode connections, 6 - reference electrode

Calorimetric system:
Around the cell was wound an isolated resistance wire as a heater for calibration of the calorimetric system and the whole cell set was placed in a gilded copper vessel as a calorimetric chamber employed in this work.
A Calvet type microcalorimeter was used in this work as described before
[3].
An electronic-constant current source or a dry cell was employed as a power
supply in different processes.

Procedure:
The calorimeter was calibrated in situ with electric current before and after
the electrorefining process. The calorimetric constant was determined from the
average of the calibration data.

The heats generated by the electrorefining of copper were measured in the
current density range from 0.379 to 1.759 mA cm -2. During the process, the energy consumptions were determined with the central rod-axis electrode used
either as the anode, or as the cathode. For examining the effect of the current
source on the calorimetric measurements, we used a dry cell instead of an electronic-constant current power supply. 


Results and discussion 

The results of calibration of this calorimeter are summarized in Table 1. The
mean error of the determination on the calorimeter is better than +4%. Therefore, the results obtained in this work should be reliable.

The calorimetric measurements during the electrorefining of copper under
different electrochemical conditions are shown in Tables 2-6. From these and
Figs 2-10, we can conclude the heat generated during the refining of copper
changes significantly with the current density employed. It is apparent that the
heat generated during these processes changes nearly as a logarithmic function
of the current density employed. 

Fig. 2a Q,]QI, as a function of Cd during electrorefining of Cu. Power supply: an electronicconstant current supply, anode: copper rod (D=0.12 cm, L=2.7 cm), cathode: copper
wire (D=0.02 cm, L>200 cm) coiled on a PE tube 

Fig. 2b Qm/Qin as a function of Cd during refining of Cu. Power supply: electronic-constant
current supply, anode: copper rod (D=0.12 cm, L=2.7 cm), cathode: copper wire
(D=0.12 cm, L=25.0 cm) coil (D=I.0 cm)

Fig. 3 Qm/Qi, as a function of Cd during electrorefining of Cu. Power supply: dry cell, anode: copper rod (D=0,12 era, L=2.7 crn), cathode: Cu wire (D=0.I2 cm, L=25.0 cm)
coil

Fig. 4 Q~/Qin as a function of Cd during electrorefining of Cu. Power supply: electronic-constant current supply, anode: Cu wire (D=0,12 cm, L=25 cm) coil (D =1 cm), cathode:
copper rod (D=0.12 era, L=2.7 cm) 

Fig. 5 Qm/Qtn as a function of Cd during electrorefining of Cu. Power supply: dry ceil, anode: Cu wire (D=0.12 era, L=25 cm) coil (D=I.0 era), cathode: copper rod
(D=0.12 crn, L=2.7 cm)

Fig. 6 Q~x as a function of Cdduring the electrorefining of Cu with the central rod as the anode and an electronic-constant current supply used 

Fig. 7 Qex as a function of Cd during the electrorefining of Cu with the central rod as the anode and an electronic-constant current power supply

Fig. 8 Qex as a function of Cd during the electrorefining process of Cu with the central rod as
the anode and a dry cell as a power supply

Fig. 9 Q~x as a function of Cd during the electrorefining process of Cu with the central rod as
the cathode and an electronic constant current supply

Fig. 10 Qe• as a function of Cd during the electrorefining of Cu with the central rod as the cathode and a dry cell as a power supply

The ratio of the measured heat to the electric input energy (Qm/Qin) increases
with the current density as a logarithmic function when the central electrode is used
as the anode, but decreases when the central electrode is the cathode, with the same
surface areas of the electrode, except one which has a larger surface area as shown
in Fig. 1. 

The excess heat (Qex) is defined as the difference between Qin and Qm calculated from the results of calorimetric measurements. The results shown in
Figs 6-10 indicate that the excess heat also depends on the current density employed. Furthermore, the excess heat (Qe• increases with the current density according to a logarithmic function while the central electrode is employed as the
anode but decreases while it is employed as the cathode. 

The results for Wm/W~n and Wex from our earlier work [3] shown in Figs 11-12
indicate a similar dependence on the current density. 

Assuming that the excess heat might be generated by an unknown voltage
caused by the electronic-constant current supply, we used a dry cell instead of it.
From the results obtained during the electrorefining of copper, which are shown in
Tables 2-4 and 5-6, do not suggest any significant effect of the power supply
employed, whether it is an electronic-constant current supply or a dry cell. 

For testing the reliability of the calorimetric measurements in this work, two
calibrations were done before and after the determinations of heats generated
during the electrorefining of copper. The results shown in Table 7, agree well
with other data obtained. 

For examining the current efficiency in the electrochemical process, the
mass of the electrode before and after running an experiment was measured several times. The results are given in Table 8. The values calculated according to
Faraday's law from the currents employed in the process are almost the same as
the measured mass changes of the electrode. 

It seems that the copper atom is dissolved from copper anode into the solution
and the copper ion is deposited onto the surface of cathode, therefore, the whole
system never changes in the sense of thermodynamics. Thus, the ratio of the
measured heat (Qm) to the input electric energy (Qin) should be equal to one.
However, it is greater than one in most cases. It appears that the heat observed in
the experiment was 'more' than the input electric energy! The results obtained
in this work compel us to accept a 'fallacy' in classical thermodynamics! In
other words, the result seems to show that it does not abide by the first law of
thermodynamics. In fact, that must be a 'false fallacy' in general thermodynamics. The problem is that we should understand correctly that the cell studied during the electrorefining of copper is not a simple thermodynamic system. The
process taking place in the cell may be irreversible and the final state may be a
non-equilibrium state. All these results indicate that the mechanism of electrodeposition of a metal is very complex because itmay occur in different stages
and may change with the electrochemical conditions. The complexity of the
electrodeposition system may be caused by these different conditions, and in
particular, by the irreversibility of the process. Therefore, we have to investigate 
the character o fan electrochemical cell and the behaviour of the electrochemical
process. In particular, one has to understand how the heat generated during an
electrochemical process can be affected by the irreversibility of the process and
varied with the changes of the thermodynamic state. From our previous work
[3], we know that the input power Wi~ in an electrochemical cell cannot be simply expressed in the common form
~ = I(Eca - Eth). It should be a function of/, and should be described by the following equation
W~. = I[TAS~ - (RT/nF)InQ + (rl. + "q~ + qmt + IRca)]

If and only if i=0, this equation expresses that the whole system of the electrochemical cell studied would be in an equilibrium state, otherwise it may be in
a non-equilibrium state. If and only if i-0, the equation can also express that the
electrochemical process may be reversible, otherwide it must be irreversible. So
the heat generated during an electrochemical process should depend on the current density (or cell voltage) employed in this practical process, i.e. the irreversible process. 


Conclusions

Fig. lla Wml~ as a function of the current density (Cd) during the electrolysis of H20

Fig. 1 lb Igex as a function of Cd during the electrolysis of H20

Fig 12a Wm./Win as a function of the current density (Cd) during the electrolysis of D20

Fig. 12b Wex as a function of Cd during the electrolysis of D20

From the results of calorimetric measurements made during the electrodeposition of copper, the following conclusions can be drawn:
1) The observed energy consumption as the heat measured during an electrochemical process (whether electrorefining of copper or electrolysis of water
in an open system) always appear to be greater than the input electric energy.

2) The heat generated during an electrochemical process depends on the current density employed. The heat measured during the electrorefining of copper
always increases with the current density in a cell with the central copper rod as the
anode, but decreases with the current density in a cell with the central copper rod as
the cathode.

3) The heat measured during the electrolysis of water in an open cell and the
electrorefining of copper seems to change in a similar manner.

4) Both the generated heat and the excess heat determined during these processes are approximated as a logarithmic function of the current density employed. 

5) From the generated heat being 'more' than the input electric energy, it appears that there may be a 'fallacy' in classical thermodynamics, but should be a
'false fallacy' in general thermodynamics.

6) If and only if i=0, the whole system of the electrochemical cell studied
could be in an equilibrium state, otherwise it should be in a non-equilibrium
state. If and only if i-0, the equation form obtained by us can express that the
electrochemical process could go through a reversible path, otherwise it must go
through an irreversible path. 

The above conclusions were drawn from the results of measurements first
carried out by us. It is very clear that investigations in this area have to be continued to determine the processes taking place in systems involving the electrorefining of metals or to describe the final state attained after a refining
process. 


References

1 M. Fleischmann, S. Pons and M. Warkins, J. Electroanal. Chem., 261 (1989) 301.
2 Zhongliang Zhang and Shuyi Liu, 'Thermodynamic theory of cold nuclear fusion' a) Frontiers of cold fusion, (Frontiers Science Series) No. 4, ISSN 0915-8520 UNIVERSAL
ACADEMY PRESS, INC. 1993. b) Progress in physics chemistry mechanics, Vol 3, 1992,
p. 185. 
3 Zhongliang Zhang, Xuezhong Sun, Weixia Zhou, Liqiang Zhang, Bin Li, Minggui Wang,
Baozhen Yan and Fu Tan, J. Thermal Anal., 45 (1995) 99.
4 Zhongliang Zhang, Baozhen Yan, Minggui Wang and Fu Tan, 'Calorimetry in electrolysis
process' The 5th national conference on solution chemistry, thermodynamics, thermochemistry, and thermal analysis', (Chengdu, China, 1990-10) ABSTRACTS p. 253.
