1. INTRODUCTION

In the traditional quantum mechanics, factor r
−l was always neglected in the solving the Schrödinger equation
of the hydrogen-like atom because the wave function diverges while r approaches to zero. Based on the previous
works, the Schrödinger equation of the hydrogen-like atom is analytically solved further here.


2. MODEL AND RESULTS

For the simplest system of two bodies with a Coulomb interaction being similar to that of the hydrogen atom,
the corresponding Schrödinger equation is. The wave function (r) is an eigen-solution of energy E and angular momentum (l, m) in the form of.
Let Rn(r) = R(r)/rˈthe radial equation is. 


3. DISCUSSION

From the results obtained above, it is not necessary to abnegate the factor r−l
just in the traditional quantum
mechanics to solve the Schrödinger equation of the hydrogen-like atom. Because there is not the problem about
the wave function to be divergence while r approaches to zero. Based on the previous works, the Schrödinger
equation of the hydrogen-like atom could be analytically solved further. When the finite size (existing a radius r0)
of a nucleus is considered the factor r−l could not be necessary to neglect. If the wave function is even existed in
the region of less than radius r0, the electron should be captured by the nucleus. In this case it seems that a nuclear
process is generated and a dineutron could be confirmed on this work as the observation of beta-delayed
two-neutron radioactivity in 1979. If not, the probability of electron in the close-by the radius r0 of nucleus
should be very large that a nuclear reaction could be generated very easily.

In this work three sets of analytical solution are obtained if the factor r−l
is not neglected. The first solution is
the same as the traditional radial wave function; another one diverges; the last one is far different from the
traditional solution. On the consideration of the finite size of the nuclear, the third wave function does not diverge
while r approaches to zero. Its radial wave function has below characteristics: (1) the angular-momentum
quantum number l must be greater than the principal quantum number n; (2) l must not be 0 or 1; (3) the
electron-cloud distribution differs from the traditional one; (4) the electron is closer to the nuclear by comparison
with that in traditional results. On the other hand, the validity of solutions needs to be verified experimentally.


4. CONCLUSION

The radial wave function obtained by us in this work has below characteristics: (1) The angular-momentum
quantum number l must be greater than the principal quantum number n; (2) l must not be 0 or 1; (3) The
electron-cloud distribution differs from the traditional one; (4) The electron is closer to the nuclear by comparison
with that in traditional results. On the other hand, the validity of solutions needs to be verified experimentally.


REFERENCES

[1] Z.L. Zhang: “Possibility of generated nuclear reaction under some special chemical conditions”, Progress in
Physical Chemistry Mechanics (in Chinese) 4 (1997) 87.
[2] Z.L. Zhang, M.H. Zhong, and Z.Q. Zhang: “Modification of the hydrogen-like atom model and a probably
existing solution of its Schrödinger equation”, HUAXUE TONGBAO (Chemistry) 3 (1998) 41.
[3] R.E. Azuma, L.C. Carraz, P.G. Hansen, B. Jonson, K.L. Kratz, S. Mattsson, G. Nyman, H.L. Ravn, A.
Schröder and W. Ziegert, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43 (1979) 1652
