INTRODUCTION

The situation of "cold fusion" in China is similar to that in Russia. Since communication was somehow
delayed, we started the "cold fusion" research based on our own understanding and the resources available
to us.

After 5 years of studies on "cold fusion", more people in China think that there must be something behind
it, and it is worthwhile to seek the truth for the fundamental physics, and for the possible future energy.

Research in China has been conducted in both theory and experiments with more emphasis on experiments.
The experiments are in two categories: (1) Attempt to set up a Chinese-based experiment; (2) Study the key
parameters which might control the reproducibility of the experiments.

We have three efforts to set up the Chinese-based experiments: (1) The electrical discharge in deuterium gas
with palladium electrode; (2) Gas loading experiments with detectors to search the precursor and the energy
carrier for the anomalous phenomena in D/Pd systems; (3) Excess heat measurements in D/Pd and D/Ti
systems.

Based on international academic exchange, the loading ratio of deuterium in palladium was selected as a key
parameter to study. We designed several systems to study the various treatments which might affect the
terminal loading ratio and the loading speed. Some factors have been identified which may enhance the
loading ratio to pass the resistance peak, and over the threshold (i.e. D/Pd~0.84).

Theory is important, although it is still in an immature stage. Wherever the experiments continued in these
5 hard years, there must be a plausible "theory" to stimulate the investigators. The penetration of the
Coulomb barrier has been a persistent subject over 5 years. Bohm's theory has been developed in three
aspects: (1) The direction of WKB connection formula, which has been a controversy for more than twenty
years; (2) A simplified formalism for WKB method which is particularly useful for a chain of potential
barriers and wells; (3) A new explanation of the penetration of potential barrier in quantum mechanics. The
recent calculation shows that the split of the Coulomb barrier may be necessary, and some experiments have
been suggested to test this idea.

We have started three new sets of experiments:
(1) The electrolysis of pressurized heavy water to study the "excess heat" in high temperature condition,
based on our experience with pressurized light water fission reactors. (2) The enhancement of spontaneous
fission in uranium due to hydrogen loading. (3) The positron annihilation studies of the surface layer of the
palladium sheet during the hydrogen loading


Electrical Discharge in Deuterium Gas

Five years ago, when the fax copies from the US were disseminated in China, a lot of experiments were tried
to reproduce the electrolysis or the gas-loading results. Some of the Chinese scientists decided to do
something else.[1-4] The electrical discharge in a deuterium gas tube was one of these pioneer works. Xiong[1]
et al. at the Southwestern Institute of Nuclear Physics and Chemistry reported the first observation of neutron
bursts in an electrical discharge tube with a palladium cathode and a tungsten anode. The neutron yield was
-106
 per burst. It was too high to convince enough people to continue this experiment in that Lab. However,
an elder scientist (Long, H.Q.[3,4]) at the Sichuan Institute of Material Technology continued this electrical
discharge experiment under difficult conditions. After three years of silent research, it was found that the
"anomalous neutron emission" was reproducible as long as three prerequisites were satisfied i.e. (1) a thin
film of palladium was formed on the surface of discharge bulb; (2) the deuterium gas was flowing through
the discharge bulb at a low pressure(5~17 Pa.); (3) the A.C. voltage between two electrodes was in certain
range (6000~17000 V.). 

The neutron emission was reproducible and verified by an activation method which was free of
electromagnetic disturbance, and there was no neutron emission in the control run with hydrogen or helium
gas. The neutron emission was considered "anomalous" because an unexpected peak was observed in the
neutron energy spectrum. The ordinary D-D neutrons were supposed to peak at 2.45 MeV; however, a high
energy component appeared with energy greater than 5 MeV. A careful study on this anomalous neutron
emission revealed that this "neutron peak" was indeed caused by the overlap of intensive X-ray radiation.[5,6]

However, it is still a puzzle why the low energy radiation is so intensive at this discharge condition.
Scientists at the Institute of High Energy Physics [7] were stimulated by this puzzle to redo their early
experiment. In 1989, they detected an anomalous low energy radiation with no neutron emission. They
stopped their experiment, because four years ago the overwhelming point of view was that neutron emission
was the necessary feature of anomalous phenomena. Now more people believe that the neutron is not
necessary, but the energy carrier must exist somehow to explain the excess heat. So they returned to their
early data again. They have found that in fact there were several peaks in the low energy radiation (< 900
keV). These peaks corresponded to the characteristic lines of spectrum for electrodes: a peak at 425+40 keV
which corresponds to the nuclear de-excitation process: 108Pd* 9 108Pd + ı (Eı = 425 keV), and a peak at
870±50 keV which corresponds to 56Fe* 9 56Fe + ı (Eı = 854 keV). 

The electrical voltage between the electrodes of the discharge tube was 10 kV, which was too low to excite
the nuclides for ı-ray emission. There should be some energetic charged particles with several MeV. So this
was an indication of nuclear reaction products. The A.C. voltage was in a pulse shape, and the instruments
for detection of neutron and ı-ray were set to work only in the intermission period when the pulse was over;
hence, it was supposed that there was no electromagnetic disturbance. One might suspect that some induced
high voltage could accelerate the deuterons to produce the ordinary D-D fusion reactions, but the neutron
detector did not register any neutrons above the background level. Hence it is 
suggested that there were two stages of reactions: the first stage was the anomalous D+D reaction which
produced only proton (3MeV) and tritium without the neutron branches; the second stage was the Coulomb
excitation induced by 3 MeV protons. Then the de-excitation gave the characteristic gamma ray. 

Calculations show that the gamma yield is about 10-6 per 3 MeV proton absorbed in palladium, and this result
can be probably explained by the decay of excited Pd* and Fe*. Since tungsten electrode was used also, there
should be a de-excitation process: 184W* 9 184W + ı (Eı=110 keV). If the low energy spectrum could get
rid of the noise, one should have seen the 110 keV gamma-ray as well. Recently an unexpected peak has
been seen around 130 keV, which could not be attributed to any Coulomb excitation process. Fortunately,
Professor Hagelstein is just looking for a peak around 129.5 keV to explain his neutron transfer reaction.


Gas Loading experiment

Another early experiment in China was to identify the precursor and the energy carrier for the anomalous
nuclear phenomena[8,9]. We proposed that the necessary product of any nuclear process is the energetic
charged particle; the neutron is not a necessary product for any nuclear process. The CR-39 plastic track
detector was used in a "freeze and thaw cycle" or D/Pd system to detect the energetic charged particles. The
CR-39 detector is particularly suitable for this process, because it can be sealed in a high pressure container
with direct contact to the palladium surface and is free of any electronic noise. It has the highest sensitivity
among all the detectors available to us. It is possible to avoid any cosmic interference by the pre-etching
method, and the air-borne radiation background can be deduced by control run with hydrogen. We saw the
energetic charged particle in the early experiments with the Russian palladium imported in the early 60's.
However, the signal was greatly reduced in the later experiments using other palladium samples or the
titanium samples.

In order to reproduce the early experiments, a systematic study[10,11] on the loading ratio (D/Pd) in gas loading
experiments was started in 1991 after a visit to Stanford Research Institute. It is clear that the reproducibility
depends on the loading process. The annealing in the vacuum, and the multiple-step loading have been
identified as two important factors which may affect the terminal loading ratio. Table 1 and Table 2 in Ref.
11 summarize the gas-loading experiments with palladium in hydrogen and in deuterium. It is possible to
reach the loading ratio of D/Pd >0.84 by annealing in the vacuum, and multiple-step loading under 30 atm.


Excess Heat Experiments

Calorimetric experimentation is difficult and requires more funds and time, so it is done in only a few
laboratories in China. The Institute of Chemistry, Academy of Science, keeps a small group using
microcalorimetry[12]; and the Institute of Atomic and Molecular Science at High Temperature and High
Pressure, Chengdu University of Science and Technology keeps doing electrolysis of heavy water with
titanium cathode and platinum anode[13]. They measured the temperature inside the Ti-rod, and observed
the extraordinary ascent of temperature five times among seven experiments. Although the explanation
of extraordinary ascent of temperature is unclear yet, they found that if a mixture of H2O and D2O was
used as the electrolyte, then no extraordinary ascent of temperature was observed. The extraordinary
ascent of temperature was about 1.5~24(C dependent on the size of the Ti-rod. The SIMS (secondary ion
mass spectrum) analysis showed strangely that the Ti-rod sample above the water level absorbed much
more hydrogen than deuterium if there was some H2O in the electrolyte. However, the Ti-rod sample
beneath the water level absorbed both deuterium and hydrogen. The
hardness and the metallurgical structure of the Ti-rod were monitored before and after electrolysis.


Theory -- Precursor and Energy Carrier

It is too early to extract any definite theoretical model from these experiments. However, it is essential to
have some kind of "plausible" theory to stimulate the effort in experiments. Five years ago when the
neutron was taken as the characteristic symbol of the anomaly in D/Pd systems, we proposed that the
energetic charged particles might be the necessary signal for any anomalous nuclear reaction. This idea
led to a series of studies using CR-39 (plastic track detector). When the sporadic bursts made the
experiment unpredictable, we suggested that there had to be some precursors before the anomaly
appeared. This idea led to careful studies about the electromagnetic radiation using thermal luminescence
detectors.[8,9] When international academic exchange revealed that the excess heat might not be
accompanied with nuclear signals, or the amount of excess heat might not be compatible with the weak
nuclear signal, we considered that a two-step model[14] might be necessary to reconcile the two facts: (1)
More experiments confirmed that there was some excess heat in the closed system[15], and in the open
system[16]; (2) The nuclear signals (helium-4[17] or tritium[18]) seemed always very weak, and were
compatible only with low level energy release. The two-step model requires a strong electron screening
effect to reduce the Coulomb barrier and release enough energy to explain the experiments. Although it
is still premature to imagine some theoretical model for this kind of screening, it is possible to deduce
some corollaries from this two-step model, which can be tested by experiment. For example, the
screening means a region of high electron density which may be detected by positron annihilation
technique; the penetration of the Coulomb barrier by resonance tunneling must help both the fusion and
fission, which might affect the spontaneous fission of the fissile elements. Both of these experiments are
currently under way in China. We have to identify what are the precursors, and what are the energy
carriers in this D/Pd system.

The other aspect of theoretical work is just to develop the theory itself to make it compatible with the
need to explain the experiments. For example, the WKB method is commonly used in quantum
mechanics for calculating barrier penetration. However, the resonance tunneling needs special attention
to the direction of the arrow of the WKB connection formula. Even in Bohm's discussion of resonance
tunneling, the problem of the direction of the arrow is barely mentioned. The famous Russian theoretical
physicist L.D.Landau said quite differently in the 1960's and 1980's[19]. This is still controversial in the
textbooks on quantum mechanics today. We investigate this problem, and find that the existing WKB
connection formula can be used only in one direction. In order to use the WKB connection formula in
resonance tunneling, it should be modified to include some additional parameters. However, the
conclusion is that the resonance tunneling is still possible with a little correction. On the other hand, the
physical explanation of resonance tunneling is still an open question. Usually, it is explained by a steady
state calculation; however, it is essentially a non-steady state phenomenon. A careful study is necessary
through both theory and experiments[20].

Another example is the uncertainty principle. If the electron cloud shrinks to form a strong screening
effect, an energy level lower than usual ground level is always assumed. The Mills model[21] or the
solutions of the relativistic Schrodinger equation and Dirac equation[22] are invoked to find this energy
level, but the uncertainty principle is not compatible with it. A multiple body problem in the crystal
lattice should be investigated.


CONCLUDING REMARKS

After five years of searching with high expectations, we are still working very hard. As long as the
experiments are getting stronger in confirmation, we will keep searching for the truth.


REFERENCES

[1] R.H. Xiong et al., "Anomalous Neutron Emission from the Discharge Tube with Palladium Electrode
and Deuterium Gas," presented at the Symposium on Cold Fusion in China, Beijing, China, (May, 1990).
[2] S.Y. Duan et al., "Fusion Neutron Emission Induced by Injection of Deuterium into Titanium Target
in a Mirror Plasma," in The Science of Cold Fusion, edited by T. Bressani et al., Italian Physical Society,
Bologna, pp 139-143 (1991).
[3] H.Q. Long et al., "The Anomalous Nuclear Effects Inducing by the Dynamic Pressure Gas Discharge
in a Deuterium/Palladium System," in Frontiers of Cold Fusion, edited by H. Ikegami, Universal
Academy Press, Tokyo, 1993, pp 455-459.
[4] H.Q. Long et al., "Anomalous Effects in Deuterium/Metal Systems." in Frontiers of Cold Fusion,
edited by H. Ikegami, Universal Academy Press, Tokyo, 1993, pp 447-454.
[5] H.Q. Long et al., "New Experiment Results of Anomalous Nuclear Effects in Deuterium/Metal
Systems," presented at ICCF4 at Maui, Dec. 6-9, 1993.
[6] Z.Q. Ma, X.Z. Li et al., "The Analysis of the Neutron Emission from the Glow Discharge in
Deuterium Gas Tube," presented at ICCF4 at Maui, Dec. 6-9, 1993.
[7] J.T. He et al., "A Study on Anomalous Nuclear Fusion Reaction by Using HV Pulse Discharge,"
presented at ICCF4 at Maui, Dec. 6-9, 1993.
[8] X.Z. Li et al., "The Precursor of 'Cold Fusion' Phenomenon in Deuterium/Solid Systems," in
Anomalous Nuclear Effects in Deuterium/Solid Systems, AlP Conference Proceedings 228, edited by
S.E. Jones, 1991, pp 419-429.
[9] S.Y. Dong, X.Z. Li et al., "Precursors to 'Cold Fusion' Phenomenon and the Detection of Energetic
Charged Particles in Deuterium/Solid System," Fusion Technology, vol 20, p 330 (1991).
[10] D.W. Mo, X.Z. Li et al., "Real Time Measurements of the Energetic Charged Particles and the
Loading Ratio (D/Pd)," in Frontiers of Cold Fusion, edited by H. Ikegami, Universal Academy Press,
Tokyo, 1993, pp 535-538.
[11] G.S. Huang, X.Z. Li et al., "The Measurements and the Control of the Loading Ratio of Deuterium
in Palladium," presented at ICCF4 at Maui, Dec. 6-9, 1993.
[12] Z.L. Zhang et al., "Calorimetric Measurements of the Electrolysis of Heavy Water at Palladium
Cathode," presented at ICCF4 at Maui, Dec. 6-9, 1993.
[13] Q.F.Zhang et al., "The Excess Heat Experiments on Cold Fusion in Titanium Lattice," presented at
ICCF4 at Maui, Dec. 6-9, 1993.
[14] X.Z. Li et al., "The 3-Dimensional Resonance Tunneling in Chemically Assisted Nuclear Fission
and Fusion Reactions," presented at ICCF4 at Maui, Dec. 6-9, 1993.
[15] M.C.H. McKubre et al., "Excess Power Observations in Electrochemical Studies of the D/Pd
System; the Influence of Loading," in Frontiers of Cold Fusion, edited by H. Ikegami, Universal
Academy Press, Tokyo, 1993, pp 5-19.
[16] M. Fleischmann and S. Pons, "Calorimetry of the Pd-D2O System: from Simplicity via
Complications to Simplicity," Physics Letters A, vol 176, p 118 (1993).
[17] M.H. Miles and B.F. Bush, "Heat and Helium Measurements in Deuterated Palladium," presented
at ICCF4 at Maui, Dec. 6-9, 1993.
[18] F.G. Will, K. Cedzynska et al., "Tritium Generation in Palladium Cathodes with High Deuterium
Loading during Heavy Water Electrolysis," presented at ICCF4 at Maui, Dec. 6-9, 1993.
[19] L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics, 2nd edition, Pergamon, Oxford,
Addison-Wesley, 1965, pp 15-17.
[20] D.K. Roy, Quantum Mechanical Tunnelling and Its Applications, Singapore, World Scientific,
1986, pp 1-79.
[21] R.L. Mills et al., "DiHydrino Molecule Identification," private communication (1993).
[22] J.A. Maly et al., "Electron Transitions on Deep Dirac Levels I," Fusion Technology, vol 24, p 307
(1993).