INTRODUCTION

Analysis for trace components in the products of an electrode reaction taking
place at a solid electrode/electrolyte solution interface is a challenge to the
experimenter. Common spectroelectrochemical methods do not have the sensitivity
or resolution necessary to quantify species present at concentrations very much
less than that (those) of the major product(s) of any given electrode reaction. An
exception to this statement is the mass spectroscopy/electrochemical technique
pioneered by Bruckenstein [1,2] and elegantly employed by Heitbaum and his
colleagues [3,4]. Even so, the literature examples of MS/ECHEM applications
usually describe detection of major components of electrode product mixtures.

In this paper we describe a MS/ECHEM interface designed to detect minor
components of an electrode reaction. The method is applied to a palladium + silver
alloy working cathode in dilute LiOD + D,O, a system chosen for its similarity to
the “cold fusion” experiment of Fleischmann, Pons and Hawkins [5,6]. Of course it
is realized that the Pd + Ag cathode used in these experiments did not correspond
exactly to the Fleischmann-Pons experimental conditions where a pure palladium
cathode was used; for that reason a direct comparison is impossible. The present
experiments were designed to detect possible production of helium and tritium
atoms in the bulk phase of an electrode undergoing the hydrogen evolution
reaction in a heavy water medium. In a separate series of experiments reported
elsewhere [7] calorimetric measurements of energy production during long-term
electrolysis were carried out using an automated diathermal calorimeter. In
neither series of experiments have we detected evidence for “cold-fusion” events.

The principle of the method of analysis is simple. Deuterium can be introduced
into the crystal lattice of a number of metals, including palladium and titanium to
form thermodynamically stable phases. For example, for Pd at a stoichiometric
ratio of PdD,,, the stable beta phase is formed [8]. This condition is readily
achieved by electrolysis. If the inside and outside surfaces of a palladium membrane
are maintained at different deuterium activities, a deuterium atom flux can
be induced through the membrane. In this way processes can be sampled that
occur in the bulk phase of the metal. Schematically the process may be written
D,/D+/Pd surface I/bulk PdDJPd surface II/D,. In the experiments described
below, the “outside electrode surface, I, was in contact with LiOD(H) solution and
the “inside” electrode surface, II, was exposed to a low pressure mixture of
gaseous products “ = vacuum”. At the inside surface D atoms can combine, then
desorb, since D, activity in the low-pressure vapor phase is small. Thus a steady
flux of D atoms is established through the metal electrode. In the experiments
described below, the flux was analyzed using a high-resolution mass spectrometer,
either (1) directly on-line, or (2) after long-term electrolyses and preconcentration
by oxidation of the D,. Particular attention was paid to the low-mass region where
possible fusion products such as helium or tritium would appear.


EXPERIMENTAL

Most of the electrolyses were performed at approximately constant current
using a load resistor and a 12 V battery, others employed a PAR Model 173
potentiostat/galvanostat. The on-line electrolyses were performed with a 12 V
battery source where the working electrode was electrically connected to the
spectrometer ground and directly attached to a GC-type spectrometer inlet.

Apparatus: A schematic diagram of the apparatus and vacuum line used for long-term
electrolyses is shown in Fig. 1. The palladium + silver alloy cathode (81 Pd + 19
Ag atom fraction) was made from a thin walled tube (thickness = 85 pm, 1.6 mm
o.d.1, 75 mm long and plugged at one end. The electrode was insulated with a
Teflon cap, and connected to the stainless steel vacuum line with a Swagelok
fitting. In order to displace occluded helium from the Pd + Ag lattice prior to the
electrolyses, hydrogen was flushed through the Pd + Ag tube for several hours by
pulling a vacuum on the tube while heating (= 870 K) in a hydrogen atmosphere.

Fig. 1. Apparatus for collecting that gaseous effluent which passes through a Pd+Ag cathode during
D,O electrolysis. (1) Hollow palladium/silver cathode, 1.6 mm o.d. (2) Concentric nickel anode, 3 cm
o.d. (3) Electrolysis cell, LiOD electrolyte, 75 cm3 volume. (4) Vent to burette collecting electrolysis
products gassing from the anode and outer cathode surfaces. (5) Pelletized CuO/clay reactor to oxidize
isotopic hydrogen gases desorbing from the inner cathode surface. (6) Thermostatting electric furnace
maintained at 560 K. (7) Thermocouple vacuum gauge. (8) High vacuum values. (9) To pump. (10)
Stainless steel collection vessel. (11) Liquid nitrogen Dewar vessel.

Mass spectrometric analysis of the gaseous electrolysis products for trace 4He
requires separation of the 4He+ peak from the Dl peak. The VG ZAB-EQ used
for these experiments is easily capable of that resolution, but in the presence of an
extremely large excess of D,, the 4He+ line appears on the shoulder of the Dz
signal. In order to increase the mass spectral sensitivity for 4He, the hydrogen
(D2, HD and H,) desorbed during the long-term electrolyses was oxidized to
water which was condensed on the walls of the sample container with liquid
nitrogen. The oxidation (at 560 f 1 K) was carried out in a 19 mm diameter
stainless steel reactor placed on-line with the electrolysis cell and charged with
clay-supported CuO [9]. With CuO as oxidizer, the procedure can be conveniently
carried out at low pressure in a sealed system. Temperature control is important. It
must be kept high enough to insure efficient oxidation, but not so high as to allow
appreciable thermal decomposition of the CuO. Before each l- to 3-week electrolysis
run, the CuO reactor was regenerated in flowing oxygen at 870 K for 24 h,
then evacuated to 1 mTorr or less at 560 K.

Electrolyses were performed at approximately constant current density using a
suitable load resistor. During the course of an electrolysis the vacuum line (i.e. the
inner electrode volume, CuO reactor and sample storage vessel) was isolated from
the pumps. Make-up water was added periodically to the electrolysis cell so that
the cathode remained totally submerged in solution. After completion of each run,
samples were collected for radiometric analysis.

Mass spectrometer inlet system: Quantification of the 4He concentration in the electrolysis gas mixture required
comparison with mixtures of known concentration. Accordingly, the all steel
sample inlet system shown in Fig. 2 was constructed. The sample container (B, Fig.
2; charged mainly with D,O formed from CuO oxidation of D, desorbed from the
inner electrode surface, and containing traces of non-condensable gas) was transferred
from the apparatus of Fig. 1 after completion of the electrolysis. The
evacuated calibration compartment (A, Fig. 2) was charged via the septum with an
appropriate amount of deaerated D,O and a measured Ar/He mixture that
yielded a 4He signal near the sensitivity limit of the mass spectrometer. (Thus, lg.1
of an STP mixture of 1 ~1 He in 0.05 1 Ar contains approximately 5 X 10” atoms of
4He.) Appropriate manipulation of valves vz and v3 allowed gas from either
compartment to equilibrate with the buffer vessel D. The molecular sieve (C, Fig.
2) served to remove water from the gas. During analysis we chose to keep the
sample vessel at room rather than liquid nitrogen temperature in order to minimize
the fraction of trace gas held in solution or trapped in the ice lattice. Isolating
the buffer vessel from the sample container and opening valve v6 introduced the
gas into the mass spectrometer. Needle valve vs controlled the leak-rate from the
buffer vessel, and was set to allow a mass spectrometer acquisition time of 1 min
(i.e. the 4He+ signal declined to about 30% of its original value after 1 min).

The mass spectrometer used for 4He detection, the VG ZAB-EQ, is a high
resolution (ultimate resolution m/Am 125,000), high mass instrument (m/z 8000
at 10 kV accelerating voltage). However, for the experiments described here it was
operated with open slits (m/Am ca. 1000) and tuned to maximum sensitivity at
very low mass (m/z l-6). Gas samples were introduced into the chemical ionization
source via a 1.6 mm i.d. Teflon tube threaded through a modified flow-FAB
inlet rod (E, Fig. 2). The “gas-tight” CI source (the only openings to the pumped
source housing are the 0.1 mm x 10 mm exit slit and the 0.2 mm diameter electron
beam entrance hole) inhibits fast diffusion of the introduced gas out of the source,
thus enhancing sensitize. Data were acquired during 60 s after opening the inlet
valve (vg, Fig. 2) by scanning the accelerating voltage to encompass the ions at
m/z = 4. Dz and 4He” were well separated (resolution required, 156; resolution
used, 1000). (When electrolysis samples were oxidized using the apparatus of Fig. 1
the large Dl peak was shown to result predominantly from fragmentation of D,O,
and not from introduction of gaseous D, (i.e. D,O vapor introduced into the mass
spectrometer via a separate reference inlet system produced similar Dl signals).
Peak intensities were time-integrated using the MCA mode of the VG-250J data
system, a computer simulation of true multi-channel acquisition. Under these
acquisition conditions, instrument sensitivity exceeded the observed “He background
signal by an estimated order of magnitude.

Scintillation counter: A Beckman Model No. 3801 liquid scintillation counter was used for the tritium
activity measurements.


RESULTS AND DlSCUSSION

Initial experiments, in which the electrode was connected directly to the mass
spectrometer (i.e. not preconcentrating with the CuO oxidation apparatus of Figs.
1 and 2) were performed using a Pd -t- Ag tube which had not been flushed at
= 870 K with hydrogen gas prior to the electrolysis. Upon initiation of the
electrolysis in a LiOD -t D,O solution, peaks at m/z values of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6
immediately appeared which could readily be assigned to various H,Dz ions fn
and m=O-3, n+m= l-3) and which approached steady state intensity after
30-60 min. Careful examination of the m/z = 4 peak revealed a weak 4He+ signal
that grew in intensity when the electrolysis was on, and decreased when the
electrolysis was off. Based on the relative intensities of the peaks and a .crude
estimation of the sensitivity factors for detection of Dz and 4Hef, the 4He content
of the gas was estimated to be 2 ppm. However, the origin of the helium in this
experiment was easily shown to be a residual impurity occluded into the electrode
from the laboratory and storeroom atmosphere and not from “cold-fusion”. Thus
(1) repetition of the experiment with LiOH + H,O gave similar results and (2) the
electrode purification treatment described in the experimental section eliminated
the 4He+ signal.

The experiments that concentrated trace gases in the all stainless steel vacuum
reactor and sample introduction system of Figs. 1 and 2 were motivated by the
above results. In this technique an electrolysis run of as much as 700 h can be
compressed into an analysis time of 1 min, representing a time compression (and
therefore a mass spectrometric sensitivity enhancement) of = 4 X lo4 as compared
with the real-time, on-line analysis. Since equilibration of the gas in container B
(Fig. 2) to the system B + C + D transferred only about half the sample to D, the
actual gain was about 2 X 104. Furthermore since the equilibration depleted the
original gas content of B by slightly more than half, only one analysis run per
electrolysis was practical.

Upon initiation of an electrolysis, the pressure inside the apparatus increased to
several hundred millitorr after 30-60 min and then remained constant for the
remainder of the run. When the electrolysis was turned off by disconnecting the
working electrode from the battery source, the pressure slowly dropped as residual
D, (or Hz) gas reacted with CuO to give condensable water. Tables 1 and 2 report
constant current coulometric data for six runs at different current densities using
this apparatus. The electrolyses, which were designed to produce a detectable
amount of helium and tritium, typically lasted for l-4 weeks.

The permeability data in Tables 1 and 2 for the transport of deuterium or
hydrogen through the working electrode were calculated in two ways. Method A
gives an integrated value based on the weighed amount of D,O (or H,O) collected
in the liquid nitrogen trap at the end of an electrolysis. This value should
underestimate the true value since it does not take into account the water
absorbed in the clay/CuO particles, or the deuterium which remains dissolved in
the Pd/Ag electrode. Permeabilities calculated by method B were based on
Faraday’s law and assumed that the gas collected over the solution was ideal; eqn.
(1) gives the amount, in moles, of D, (or H,) taken up and/or passing through the
electrode in t s.
ninside = (3/2) c ft/2F) - nwtside. This equation assumes 100% current efficiency for the electrolysis reaction. In
Tables 1 and 2 the permeabilities are expressed as ml(STP) h-‘. The tables also
report the fraction of deuterium passing into or through the electrode, f, =
2Fni,,id,/(n), as a function of current density.

Deuterium flux through the Pd + Ag membrane, (1/2t;)f,, is shown vs. electrolysis
time for a run at 500 mA in Fig. 3. A rapid decrease in flux occurred in the
first hour, then the system settled down apparently to steady state. Similar
behavior was seen at lower current densities. We associate the large initial values
of deuterium flux with charging of the electrode lattice. The magnitude of the
initial value of p in Fig. 3 was consistent with a l-to-l ratio of Pd to D in the
Pd + Ag working electrode. For example, the electrode mass corresponded to a
STP equivalent of 59 ml of D2.

Fig. 3. Permeability of D, (or H,) through the hollow Pd+ Ag cathode vs. time. Run IV (LiOD in
D,O), I = 500 mA.

In run VI of Table 1 the dependence of D atom flux on current was explored
(see Table 2). The results show that the flux decreased with increasing current.
After steady state was established at 100 mA or more, deuterium flw through the
electrode was only a small fraction (less than 1%) of total deuterium generated. In
contrast, as much as 10% of the deuterium was absorbed into the lattice during the
initial charging process. Finally, the data in Tables 1 and 2 indicate a significant
isotope effect on the lattice permeability, pri > CL,,, but are not precise enough to
define that isotope effect quantitatively with useful precision.

Wicke and coworkers [lO,ll], Volkl [12] and others [13,14] have measured H/D
diffusion coefficients in several metals including Pd and Pd + Ag alloys. In the
latter materials the isotope effect is generally opposite to that which we observe
for the overall permeabilities: ph/pd = 1.5 + 0.5 (Tables 1 and 2). For example
Holleck and Wicke [ll] report lo7 D, = 1.55 f 0.3 and D, = 1.05 f 0.2 cm2 s-l at
25°C in Pd,,, + Ag,,z. Of course the present experiments do not measure the
diffusion coefficient in the lattice itself, but rather the total gas permeability at
constant electrolysis current. Because one expects an isotope effect on overpotential,
and thus on the hydrogen atom activity at the solution side of the metal
membrane, our experiments are not directly comparable with such literature
values.

Analysis for helium-4 and tritium in the reaction products:
Data for runs where quantitative analysis for 4He was possible are reported in
Table 3. (Of the six runs in Table 1, numbers I and III contained large amounts of
air due to a leak and could not be analyzed in the mass-4 region with useful
sensitivity, number II was an H,O blank run.) In each of the three experiments in
Table 3, the total amount of 4He was on the order of magnitude of 10” atoms in
the ca. 50 ml sample flask which also contained several hundred millitorr non-condensables.
For each of these experiments the 4He fraction of the non-condensable
gases was not significantly different from the value for dry air, 5.2 ppm. We
conclude that the 4He in these samples was from air contamination, most likely by
degassing of the clay/CuO reactor, or from a very small leak, over the l- to 2-week
electroIyses. We note that the sensitivity of the 4He analysis could be improved by
lowering the CuO-clay/air degassing or the leak rates during the electrolysis, but
that effort would not be useful unless the 4He background in the mass spectrometer
were also lowered. For the data of Table 3, the signal-to-background ratio was
between 3 and 20. Thus it would not be useful to Iower the degassing/air leak rate
in the electrolyses by more than a factor of about 2 to 5 unless the background
signal coutd be reduced by an equivalent amount.

It is also of interest to calculate the ratio of 4He atoms in the collection flask to
the number of deuterium or hydrogen atoms present as water. For example, from
Tables 1 and 3 the 4He/D(H) ratio was 4 X 10V1’ for the H,O electrolysis at 100
mA, 3.5 X lo- I1 for the D,O electrolysis at 100 mA, and larger for the D,O
electrolysis at 500 mA where the amount of heavy water collected was unaccountably
much smaller. These ratios represent a significant improvement over the
direct mass spectral detection of 4He in a deuterium sample, where as noted
above, the 4He+ signal appeared on the shoulder of the D$ signal. It is important
to note the He/D ratios measured in these experiments do not set an upper limit
for possible 4He production by a “cold fusion” process since they are fuIIy
consistent with degassing of atmospheric gases from the CuO/clay train.

The initial D,O or H,O solutions, the electrolyzed solutions, and the D,O
formed by CuO oxidation of the D, which had passed through the electrode were
analyzed for tritium by liquid scintillation counting. After mixing the samples with
an aqueous scintillation cocktail, 20 min counting periods were repeated three
times for each of the four samples for each electrolysis (Table 4). The observed
tritium Ievels in the commercial D,O sampIes were within the range specified by
the supplier. The data indicate that the LiOD + D,O solutions were enriched in
tritium as expected. The observed enrichment was consistent with the known
isotope effect for the hydrogen evolution reaction and the amount of make-up
water added during the electrolyses. On the other hand, the tritium activity of the
CuO oxidized permeate was less than that of the initial solutions, indicating that
the isotope effect on the mass transport of hydrogen through the Pd + Ag lattice
was normal, i.e. H > D > T. Had any tritium been produced in the lattice, our
expectation was that it would be swept into the CuO reactor. Within the precision
of the measurements reported in Table 4, no such enrichment was observed.

Our failure to observe 4He production during electrolysis of Li + DOD solutions
with a palladium + silver electrode is in contrast to the recent Bush, Lagowski,
Miles and Ostrom (BLMO) report [15]. While this might be a consequence of the
fact that the electrodes are not identical, we think a more likely explanation is that
BLMO failed to pretreat their electrodes to remove occluded helium. As pointed
out above we have found that such contaminating helium is electrolytically degassed.


CONCLUSION

A mass spectral method is described for the analysis of trace amounts of helium
in a deuterium sample formed by electrolysis of a heavy water solution. The limit
of detection for 4He was approximately 1 X 1011 atoms. The deuterium collected
permeated a thin palladium/silver cathode operating in the hydrogen evolution
region. The fraction of the product gas that permeates the electrode (relative to
the total gas produced) was a function of the duration of the electrolyses and
decreased with increasing current density. No evidence was found for the production
of unusually large amounts of either 4He or tritium in electrolyses in
LiOD + D,O. That observation is consistent with calorimetric results reported
elsewhere [7].


REFERENCES

1 S. Bruckenstein and R.M. Gadde, J. Am. Chem. Sot., 93 (1971) 5941.
2 M. Petek, S. Bruckenstein, B. Feinberg and R.N. Adams, J. Electroanalytical Chem., 42 (1973) 397.
3 0. Walter and J. Heitbaum, Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem., 88 (1984) 2.
4 D. Tegtmeyer and J. Heitbaum, Ber. Bunsenges. Phys. Chem., 93 (1989) 201.
5 M. Fleischmann, S. Pons and M. Hawkins, J. Electroanal. Chem., 261 (1989) 301; 263 (1989) 187.
6 M. Fleischmann, S. Ports, M.W. Anderson, L.J. Li and M. Hawkins, J. Electroanal. Chem., 287
(1990) 293.
7 A. Zywocinski, H.L. Li, A.A. Tuinman, P. Campbell, J.Q. Chambers and W.A. Van Hook,
Thermochimica Acta, in press.
8 H.M. Mueller, J.P. Blackledge and G.G. Libowitz, Metal Hydrides, Academic Press, New York,
1968.
9 A. Arneil, J. Sot. Chem. Ind., 53 (1934) 897.
10 G. Bohmholdt and E. Wicke, Zeit. Phys. Chem. N.F., 56 (1967) 133.
11 G. Holleck and E. Wicke, Zeit. Phys. Chem. N.F., 56 (1967) 155.
12 J. Volkl, Ber. Bunsenges Phys. Chem., 76 (1972) 797.
13 R.V. Bucur, Zeit. Phys. Chem. N.F., 146 (1985) 613.
14 R.C.J. Willeman, M. Boyle and I.R. Harris, Zeit. Phys. Chem. N.F., 164 (1989) 797.
15 B.F. Bush, J.J. Lagowski, M.H. Miles and G.S. Ostrom, J. EiectroanaI. Chem., 304 (1991) 271.



