INTRODUCTION

In the context of recent claims [1,2] of excess energy production during
electrolysis of LiOD solutions with palladium cathodes, we decided to carry
out calorimetric studies to supplement our efforts to detect 4He or T
production by a mass spectroscopic technique [3]. The magni~de of the
excess enthalpy expected from cold fusion (i.e. the enthalpy change over
and above that established for normal electrochemical processes), and
previously claimed by Fleischmann and co-workers [1,2] is so large that it
should be easily detected, even with very simple calorimetry. Because “cold
fusion”, if it occurs at all, is expected only at odd intervals, or after long
induction periods, we employed a calorimeter designed to operate unattended
over long periods. For that purpose we constructed a simple
diathermal calorimeter monitored with a computer controlled data system.


CALORIMETRIC TECHNIQUE

In a calorimeter designed to measure a constant heat flux, thermal
power is exchanged with the surroundings (or “bath”) at a constant rate
(dq/dt)ca~ori=m -e(tdeqr/ ‘dt)bath-If the bath is held at constant temperature
the cell will come to a different (and higher) temperature after
sufficient time. If the temperature difference is not too large, the process is
first order and (dq/dt) = -k(T,,, - Tbath). The proportionali~ constant k
may be deduced by making a series of steady state measurements at
different heat flares. It is also useful to examine the kinetics of the first
order decay of (T,,, - Tbati,> when the power input to the cell is switched
off. In that case the heat flux, cell to bath, decays as the cell temperature
drops, d(dq/dt) = -c dT. The cell temperature reaches bath temperature
after a suitably long time, where TCC,,,=m Ta = Tbath. Appropriate substitution
leads to ln[(T - K)/(l;, - Tm>l = - (k/c)(t - to), where T,, is the cell temperature at time t, when the decay process is
started. For the present experiments the total temperat~e change is small,
amounting at most to a few degrees, and the temperature difference
2”,,, - TbEMl is accurately proportional to the change in resistance of the
platinum RTD temperature sensors,‘ AT = a AR, so
(f - to) = -(c/k) ln[(AR - AR,)/(ARo - AR,)].
We determined c/k and k by appropriate measurements of decay rates
and steady state measurements of resistance differences as a function of
heat flux into the electrochemical cell. Least squares analysis of the
individual runs showing AR versus t allowed definition of the fitting
parameters -(c/k), AR, and to. The assumption of first order decay was
nicely borne out by the measurements.

In long-time electrolysis runs the amount of material in the calorimeter
slowly decreased as D, (or H,) and 0, gassed off, and the assumption of
constant mass, which is intrinsic to the development above, was not met.
The result was a slow drift in (Tcell - Tbath) which continued until make-up
water was added. (Typically about 25% of the starting material was
electrolyzed; make-up water was added every few days, and the amount of
fluid in the cell was never allowed to drop below 95% of the initial value.)
In any event the slow drift from this cause can in no sense disturb the
detection of periodic or occasional energy bursts of the kind claimed by
Fleischmann and Pons. Those bursts should appear as large peaks on
time-temperature plots of the calorimeter data. Indeed, Fleischmann et al.
[2] showed figures of several time-temperature plots displaying large
transient peaks of this nature.


CALORIMETRIC EXPERIMENT

The calorimeter resulting from the considerations above is shown diagrammatically in Fig. 1. The electrolysis cell and its surrounding air jacket
(introduced to give convenient values for k and k/c) are completely
submerged in a reservoir (bath) containing about 70 dm3 of water. The
bath is not thermostatted but is large enough appreciably to damp room
temperature fluctuations. Over long times the bath thermally averages
room temperature, but a slow thermal wave with an amplitude of 0.01 to
0.02 K for (Teen - Tbath) and one-day periodicity is observed. That slow
change is the equivalent, peak to peak, of l-2% or so of the thermal flux,
and sets the limit on sensitivity for the detection of slow changes in heat
flux. More rapid changes, say ones with characteristic rise times of 1 h or
less, can be detected with somewhat better sensitivity, about 0.5%. The
electrodes and calibrating heater are powered from a potentiostat to assure
a constant current for electrolysis or calibration. The electrolysis or heater
currents are measured by determining the voltage drop across a standard
resistor. Cell and bath temperatures were measured with four-terminal 100
n platinum wound RTD elements. The electrolysis or heater calibration
currents were recorded with an Apple II computer using a DAIS1 AI-13
interface. The RTD resistances were also read by the computer, which
queried a high precision Guildine 9576 datastore digital voltmeter in its
remote mode.

Fig. 1. Electrolysis cell used for diathermal calorimetric measurements. Key: 1, Pd or Ti
cathode; 2, reference electrode; 3, Pt anode concentric to cathode; 4, calibration electrical
resistance heater; 5, electrolyte solution; 6, platinum resistance thermometer (cell); 7,
external glass jacket separated from electrolysis cell by 0.5 cm air gap; 8, Teflon cap; 9,
platinum resitance thermometer (bath).

During electrolysis, RTD resistances and electrolysis current and voltage
were periodically sampled by the computer and the data were stored. The
frequency of measurement was adjustable, but we normally made a complete
reading once every 5 or 10 min, usually reading data every minute (or
less), testing for large excursions from a running average, but printing or
storing data points less frequently, say every 10 min. In any event we were
always careful to record with a frequency much higher than the equivalent
of the thermal relaxation time of the calorimeter. This insured that no
significant excursion of the heat flux from its characteristic average value
would be missed by the data collection routine. The scheme considerably
eases the data analysis problem.

Power input to the electrochemical cell is divided into. an efectrochemical
part (used to generate gaseous oxygen and hydrogen from the electrolyte)
and a thermal part. The latter is calculated from P cell,thermal = (dq/dt)ce*l = (U~/~sr)(~ie~~ -EthJ
where US, is the voltage drop across the standard resistor, R,, = 4.919 a,
Ucel, is the measured voltage difference between the anode and the cathode
of the electrolysis cell, and E,, is the thermochemical voltage as calculated
from the free energy of formation of D,O (or H,O for control experiments)
from the elements, E,, = -AG,/2F. The free energy is not the
standard state value but should be corrected for the fact that neither
product nor reactants are in their standard states, nor are the experiments
at precisely the standard temperature of 298 K. However, the differences
are small and may be neglected at the level of precision appropriate to the
present experiments.


ELECTROLYSES

We used several sets of electrodes in the calorimetric experiments. In
the first, a Pd rod cathode (6.35 mm diam. X 25 mm) with an active surface
of 5.30 cm2 running against a concentric platinum cylinder anode was
employed. A second series of measurements was made with a titanium
cathode (6.35 mm diam. X 60 mm) running against the Pt anode. Yet
another group used a tubular Pd/Ag cathode of the type described in a
previous paper [3]. The electrolysis cell was filled with about 75 cm3 of 0.25
M LiOD dissolved in D,O (or approximately the same volume of 0.25 M
LiOH dissolved in H,O in control experiments). Many runs were performed
over a reasonable range of current densitites. Typically the electrochemical
parameters and RTD resistances were sampled every minute, Ten
point averages were calculated and stored for the duration of the run,
which lasted normally between 2 days and 2 weeks. The thermal relaxation
time of the calorimeter (see discussion above) is long compared with the
rate of accumulation of data, so that it would be impossible to miss thermal
excursions of the kind described by Fleischmann and co-workers [1,2]. All
time-temperature plots for many experiments made during the 18 month
period between June 1989 and December 1990 show no deviation from
smooth steady state behavior and no excess power production which we can
attribute to “cold fusion”. Those few anomalies which we did observe early
in the development of our experimental procedures disappeared as we
refined apparatus and techniques.

Fig. 2. RTD resistance-time curves in the region of the ending portion of an electrolysis
run. The cooling curve which results from turning off the electrolysis is clearly shown. The
zero time marker is arbitrarily inserted; this particular run lasted 37 days with very slow
temperature drifts centered around (R, - R,) = 3.7 a. The slow resistance changes shown
in the approximately level portion are typical of the slow drift in the equilibration point of
the calorimeter as room temperature shifts. They set the limit on the sensitivity for the
detection of thermal events with long time constants.

In addition to the steady state electrolyses described above and reported
in more detail below, we made a number of runs where the voltage applied
to the cathode was pulsed periodically (with a frequency on the order of
tens of seconds) between zero and 1.6-1.7 V, reasoning that this technique
would pulse the D atom activity in the Pd lattice. No anomalous heating
was observed under these conditions.

The ending part of a typical electrolysis run is shown in Fig. 2, and
results of a typical set of runs are reported in Tables 1 and 2. Numerical
analysis of the cooling at the end of a run yields SR = AR, - AR,, and the
heat loss from the cell at steady state (dq/dt) =K6R is obtained by
picking the appropriate value of K from a calibration plot of data such as
those found in the last column of Table 1. The heat balances are within 1%
except for the low-current run where the relative errors are larger.

A complete report of our calorimetric effort extending over many
months is available [4]. These data, which are not presented here in any
detail, can be summarized with the statement that we were unable to
detect any thermal inconsistencies which can be attributed to untoward
effects such as “cold fusion” (i.e. thermal excursions with time constants
between 1 min and several hours yielding heat balances deviating by more
than a few percent from the electrochemically calculated values).


CONCLUSION

The present calorimeter was designed to detect power bursts during
electrolysis of LiOD-D,O solutions using a palladium (or titanium) cathode.
Our interest was frankly focused on large excursions from those
heating rates expected from normal electrochemical processes. The
calorimeter is of sufficient sensitivity to detect an excess power pulse of as
little as several minutes duration in runs lasting between several days and
several weeks. Our experience with this apparatus during a period of
development and use in excess of one year reveal no excess heat production.
We have also recently reported experiments designed to detect the
production of trace amounts of helium and/or tritium in the interior of a
palladium-silver electrode during electrolysis of LiOD solutions. Electrolysis
products that diffused through the evacuated tubular electrode were
concentrated by reaction of H,, HD and D, with CuO, then analyzed by
mass spectroscopy and radiometry. The limit of detection for 4He was
1 x 1011 atoms. No evidence for production of helium or tritium by “cold
fusion” was detected [3]. This result disagrees with that of Bush et al. [S].


REFERENCES

1 M. Fleischmann, S. Pons and M. Hawkins, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem.,
261 (1989) 301; 263 (1989) 187.
2 M. Fleischmann, S. Pons, M.W. Anderson, L.J. Li and M. Hawkins, J. Electroanal. Chem.
Inter-facial Electrochem., 287 (1990) 293.
3 A. Zywocinski, H.L. Li, A.A. Tuinman, P. Campbell, J.Q. Chambers and W.A. Van
Hook, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., in press.
4 A. Zywocinski, H.L. Li, A.A. Tuinman, P. Campbell, J.Q. Chambers, and W.A. Van
Hook, Internal Report, University of Tennessee, 1990.
5 B.F. Bush, J.J. Lagowski, M.H. Miles and G.S. Ostrom, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial
Electrochem., 304 (1991) 271.



